
• An original, renewal, or replacement ID 
card may be issued at no fee to any 
applicant who presents a valid Florida 
voter registration card can attest that 
they are experiencing a financial 
hardship.  
• An identification card may be issued at 
no fee to an applicant who is 80 years 
of age or older and whose driving 
privilege has been denied due to not 
passing the required vision exam.  
• FLHSMV will cancel the applicant’s 
valid driver’s license upon issuance of 
the ID card. 
• The applicant must still provide Real ID 
documents if they are not already Real 
ID compliant. 
SB 364 – Specialty License Plates  
• Creates eight new specialty license 
plates and one specialty motorcycle 
plate. More information is available at: 
flhsmv.gov/personalized-specialty
license-plates. 
• Extends presale period for two years 
for plates currently in the presale 
process and reduces the threshold for 
out-of-state specialty plates. 
• Reduces the cap on the number of 
specialty plates from 150 to 135. 
SB 474 – Recreational Off-Highway 
Vehicles 
• Increases the dry weight allowed for 
recreational off-highway vehicles from 
2,500 pounds to 3,500 pounds. 
HB 749 – Fraud Prevention  
• Requires FLHSMV to include vehicle 
registration and insurance information 
into the mobile driver license (Florida 
Smart ID). The digital credential must  
display vehicle insurance information, 
notify of any lapse in insurance 
coverage, and allow individuals to 
update policy information.  
SB 754 – Mobile Home Registration 
Periods  
• Beginning September 1, 2023, the 
registration period for mobile homes 
owned by natural persons to the 
owner’s birth month.  
SB 914 – Department of Highway Safety 
and Motor Vehicles  
• Requires an operator of a motor 
vehicle to provide proof of insurance 
upon the request of a law enforcement 
officer (previously applied only to 
drivers who were also registered 
owners). 
• Provides a fee exemption for a 
surviving spouse transferring a motor 
vehicle title solely into their name when 
only the deceased spouse is named on 
the title. 
• Prohibits individuals who have 
registration stops from replacing their 
license plate until they have satisfied 
the underlying stop.  
• Beginning November 1, 2023, driver 
licenses and identification card 
numbers will include four randomly 
generated digits. 
HB 915 – Commercial Motor Vehicle 
Registration  
• Beginning July 1, 2024, FLHSMV will 
issue apportionable license plates, for 
commercial motor vehicles that travel 
across state borders. License plates 
are valid for a 3-year period. Registration 
remains valid for one year.
Version: July 2022 
ii 
Florida Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
Message from the Director 
For as long as there have been roadways and motorized 
vehicles in Florida, commercial transportation has played  
a key role in the lives of our citizens.  
From the thousands of 18-wheelers responsible for 
supporting our economy and way of life to the fleets of 
buses that many of our people rely on for transit services, 
commercial transportation has proven to be absolutely  
vital to our wonderful state. Florida would not be such a 
great destination it is if not for the many contributions of 
commercial vehicles.  
We here at the Florida Department of Highway Safety  
and Motor Vehicles are devoted to achieving our vision  
of A Safer Florida. That means proactively protecting  
our roadways, enhancing our online services, increasing 
strategic relationships with stakeholders, improving 
customer service, measuring critical business indicators  
and managing based on those results.  
It also means educating those who would operate motor vehicles on our roads and highways. 
This manual provides some basic information you will need to be a safe driver and understand 
traffic laws and regulations – including those that originate here in Florida, as well as those  
on the federal level. The knowledge you take from this publication, along with your driving 
experience and sense of responsibility while driving, will help protect you, your family, your 
friends and other highway users.  
As a department, we will continue to make doing business with us easier, faster and better.  
Safe and considerate driving is everyone’s responsibility, and we wish you many years of  
happy and safe driving.  
Robert Kynoch, Director  
Division of Motorist Services 
Version: July 2022 
i 
Florida Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
Contact Information 
Customer Service Center  ................................................................................. (850) 617-2000 
FLHSMV Official Website  ......................................................................................... flhsmv.gov 
Online Transactions (DHSMV Virtual Office)  ........................................MyDMVPortal.flhsmv.gov 
Identification Requirements (for obtaining a credential) .......................... flhsmv.gov/WhatToBring 
To Order a Crash Report  .................................................................................. (850) 617-3416 
Neil Kirkman Building  
2900 Apalachee Parkway 
Tallahassee, Florida 32399 
Appointments 
Appointments are recommended for any of the services provided by the driver license offices. 
Appointment scheduling and a listing of driver license offices are available online at: 
flhsmv.gov/locations. Schedule an appointment in advance and report at least five minutes 
before your scheduled time. 
Crash Reports 
Crash reports can be purchased online at www.floridacrashportal.gov. Additional fees may apply.  
Crash reports completed by the Florida Highway Patrol are kept in the local districts for two 
years from the date of the crash. Homicide reports are kept in the local district for five years from 
the date of the crash. 
• To order a crash report ($10) older than 2 years, call (850) 617-3416. 
• To order a traffic homicide report ($25) older than 5 years, call (850) 617-2306. 
• To order traffic homicide photographs, call (850) 617-3409. 
• Photographs are $1 for 5”x7” or $1.50 for 8”x10.” 
Note: When requesting photographs, have at least two of the following pieces of information 
available when you place your request: 
• Date of crash 
• County of crash 
• Name of fatality victim 
• Traffic homicide case number 
Emergency Contact Information  
If you have a Florida driver license or ID card, register your emergency contact information at 
the FLHSMV website flhsmv.gov. This provides law enforcement with an immediate contact in 
case you are involved in an emergency.   
Version: July 2022 
ii 
Florida Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
Florida 511 Traffic Info 
Always be prepared! The Florida 511 Traveler Information System is a toll-free service by the 
Florida Department of Transportation that provides real-time traffic information on crashes, travel 
times, congestion, lane closures, severe weather, and construction on Florida’s interstates, toll 
roads, and other major metropolitan roadways.  
There are four convenient ways for motorists to receive traffic updates:*  
• Call 511 (English and Spanish).  
• Visit FL511.com.  
• Download the free “Florida 511” app.  
• Follow any of the statewide, regional, or roadway-specific feeds on Twitter. 
* Use these resources before driving—or when pulled over in a safe place such as a rest area—
not while operating a motor vehicle. 
Dial ∗FHP (∗347) to report impaired drivers or dangerous road conditions. 
Florida Organ & Tissue Donor Program  
Donate Life Florida is the non-profit organization that oversees the state’s organ, eye, and tissue 
donor registry. The Joshua Abbott Organ & Tissue Donor Registry allows Floridians to join the 
state’s organ and tissue donor registry when obtaining/renewing their license at a local driver 
license/tax collector office.  
DonateLifeFlorida.org  
1-877-FL-SHARE 
Florida’s Move Over Law  
The Move Over Law protects law enforcement officers, emergency workers, tow truck drivers, 
sanitation workers, utility workers and road and bridge maintenance or construction vehicles 
displaying warning lights stopped along roadways while performing their jobs.  
On a Multi-Lane Roadway   
• You must vacate the lane closest to the stationary law enforcement, emergency vehicle, 
tow truck, sanitation, or utility vehicle. (Signal your intention to change lanes.) 
• If you cannot move over safely, you must slow down to a speed of 20 MPH below the 
posted speed limit. 
• Drivers who are not in the lane closest to the stationary vehicle should be prepared to 
allow those who are about to move over into their lane. 
On a Two-Lane Roadway 
• You must slow down to a speed of 20 MPH below the posted speed limit. 
• If the speed limit is 20 MPH or less, you must travel at 5 MPH. 
Version: July 2022 
iii 
Florida Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
Entry-Level Driver Training (ELDT) 
ELDT regulations set the minimum Federal requirements for training that entry-level drivers  
must complete before being permitted to take certain commercial driver’s license (CDL) skills or 
knowledge tests on or after February 7, 2022. 
Who is considered an entry-level driver? 
Individuals applying to: 
• Obtain a Class A CDL or Class B CDL for the first time; 
• Upgrade an existing Class B CDL to a Class A CDL; 
• Obtain a school bus (S), passenger (P), or hazardous materials (H) endorsement for the 
first time. 
For additional information, please see: www.fmcsa.dot.gov/registration/commercial-drivers
license/entry-level-driver-training-eldt 
School Bus Waiver 
Due to a shortage of school bus drivers, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration 
(FMCSA) granted a waiver of certain testing requirements for school bus drivers. This waiver 
covers states for the period of January 3, 2022, through September 30, 2022, and may be 
extended. Florida began using this waiver on February 16, 2022. 
Under this waiver, the engine compartment portion of the pre-trip inspection skills test may be 
waived for persons seeking the (S) - School Bus endorsement. Persons issued a CDL under this 
waiver must be restricted to both (U) - School Bus Only and (K) - Intrastate Only. In order to 
remove the School Bus Only restriction a driver will be required to successfully complete a skills 
test that includes the engine compartment portion of the Pre-trip Inspection. 
Check Out All You Can Do At flhsmv.gov! 
✓ Renew your vehicle registration 
✓ Register emergency contact info 
✓ Find locations of motor vehicle 
service centers 
✓ Access driving history of your teen 
✓ Check your driver license 
✓ Track your driver license or ID card 
order status 
✓ Verify driving school status 
✓ Check personalized plate availability 
✓ Update your insurance information 
✓ Find third-party exam providers 
✓ Submit a question (Answered in 2 
business days) 
✓ Download driver license handbooks 
✓ Check your driving school eligibility 
✓ Update your address 
✓ Obtain an electronic title
Version: July 2022 
iv 
This material is based upon work supported by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Administration under Cooperative Agreement No. DTFH61-97-X-00017.  Any 
opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this 
publication are those of the Author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of 
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. 
COPYRIGHT © 2005 AAMVA.  All rights reserved 
This material has been created for and provided to State Driver License Agencies (SDLAs) by AAMVA for the purpose of educating Driver 
License applicants (Commercial or Non-Commercial).  Permission to reproduce, use, distribute or sell this material has been granted to 
SDLAs only.  No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system without express written permission from the author / publisher.  
Any unauthorized reprint, use, distribution or sale of this material is prohibited. 

In January 2015, an RV pulled into a truck stop in Virginia. Observant professional truck driver Kevin Kimmel recognized 
suspicious activity around that RV, which had pulled back by the truck line, and decided something was off.  Instead of turning a 
blind eye, he made a call that brought law enforcement out to the scene within a few minutes.  After interviewing the occupants 
of the vehicle, they discovered that a young woman, 20 years old, had been kidnapped from Iowa two weeks prior.  She had 
been beaten, raped, her whole body burned by instruments heated on the RV stove, branded and starved.  She was being sold by 
her traffickers, Laura Sorenson and Aldair Hodza, through sex ads on Craigslist, where men were purchasing her and then arriving 
at the RV to rape her.  She was dying from malnutrition and the torture she was subjected to … had the call not been made that 
brought law enforcement out to that truck stop, doctors said she would have died within the next few days. Now a recovering 
survivor, this young woman calls Kimmel her guardian angel. He calls himself a Trucker Against Trafficking.  
Truckers Against Trafficking is a non-profit organization that has been working with the trucking industry since 2009 to provide 
the needed training and tools to enable members of the industry to both recognize human trafficking when they see it 
happening and to know what actions to take to enable law enforcement to effectively fight this crime. Through this training and 
these tools, truckers are becoming Everyday Heroes like Kevin Kimmel, who was also named TAT’s 2015 Harriet Tubman Award 
winner. 
One of the tools TAT provides is a wallet card with red flags 
to look for, questions to ask if you suspect someone is a 
victim and actionable information to report. This wallet card 
is available by App, from the appropriate App Store, on all 
smart phones, whether Android, iPhone or Windows format, 
as well as by emailing tat.truckers@gmail.com, for a version 
to carry in your wallet. 
Additionally, TAT provides a powerful, 26-minute training 
video on its website (www.truckersagainsttrafficking.org), 
which, when watched along with taking and passing a short test, certifies drivers as TAT-Trained, a designation which can go on 
your resume.  Because professional drivers often find themselves in locations frequented and exploited by human traffickers, 
they are in a unique position to recognize the signs of human trafficking and to make the call that can lead to victim recovery and 
perpetrator arrests. Get your wallet card today. Be an Everyday Hero! Make the call (1-888-3737-888); save lives! 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1-1 
Driving Safely ................................................................................................................................... 2-1 
Transporting Cargo Safely ............................................................................................... 3-1 
Transporting Passengers Safely ............................................................................... 4-1 
Air Brakes ............................................................................................................................................. 5-1 
Combination Vehicles ............................................................................................................ 6-1 
Doubles and Triples ................................................................................................................. 7-1 
Tank Vehicles .................................................................................................................................. 8-1 
Hazardous Materials ................................................................................................................ 9-1 
School Bus ........................................................................................................................................ 10-1 
Vehicle Vehicle Inspection ............................................................................................. 11-1 
Basic Vehicle Control Skills Test ............................................................................ 12-1 
On-Road Driving ......................................................................................................................... 13-1 
 
  
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
Section 1  
INTRODUCTION 
This Section Covers 
• Commercial Driver License Tests 
• Medical Requirements 
• Driver Disqualifications 
• Other Safety Rules 
• International Registration Program 
There is a federal requirement that each state have 
minimum standards for the licensing of commercial 
drivers.  
This manual provides driver license testing 
information for drivers who wish to have a 
commercial driver license (CDL). This manual does 
NOT provide information on all the federal and state 
requirements needed before you can drive a 
commercial motor vehicle (CMV). You may have to 
contact your state driver licensing authority for 
additional information. 
You must have a CDL to operate: 
Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight 
rating (GVWR) of 26,001 pounds or more. 
A combination vehicle with a gross combination 
weight rating (GCWR) of 26,001 or more pounds, 
provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is 
in excess of 10,000 pounds. 
A vehicle designed to transport 16 or more 
passengers (including the driver). 
Any size vehicle which requires hazardous material 
placards or is carrying material listed as a select 
agent or toxin in 42 CFR part 73. Federal 
regulations through the Department of Homeland 
Security require a background check and 
fingerprinting for the Hazardous Materials 
endorsement. Contact your local department of 
driver licensing for more information.    
(Your state may have additional definitions of 
CMVs.) 
CDL Classifications 
The CDL vehicle classification included in the 
federal standard, together with the type of cargo to 
be transported, determine what type of CDL license 
and endorsement an applicant must apply for. 
There are three basic vehicle classes or groups: 
Class A   Combination Vehicles. Any combination 
of vehicles with gross combination weight rating 
(GCWR) of 26,001 or more pounds falls in Group A 
provided the GVWR of the vehicle(s) being towed is 
more than 10,000 pounds. Most Class A vehicles 
are trucks such as truck-tractor/semi-trailer or truck 
and trailer combinations. However, tractor-trailer 
buses may be found in a few communities. Driving a 
Class A vehicle requires considerably more skill and 
knowledge than driving vehicles in Classes B and C. 
Since these skills include those required to drive a B 
and C vehicle, a driver who has a Class A license 
also may drive vehicles in Classes B and C. 
Class B   Heavy Straight Vehicles. Any single 
vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 or more pounds falls 
in Group B, or any such vehicle towing another 
vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR. 
Class B includes straight trucks and large buses, 
including articulated buses. Safely driving these 
heavy vehicles requires considerably more 
knowledge and skill than driving the small trucks and 
buses found in Class C. Since they include the skills 
required to drive Class C vehicles, drivers who have 
qualified for a Class B license may also drive vehicles 
in Class C. 
Class C   Small Vehicles. Any single vehicle with a 
GVWR less than 26,001 pounds falls in Group C, or 
any such vehicle towing another vehicle not in 
excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR. However, vehicles 
of this size are included in the CDL program only if 
they are: 1) Designed to carry 16 or more passengers 
including the driver, or (2) Used to transport 
hazardous materials in quantities requiring 
placarding
 under
 the
 Hazardous Materials 
Regulations (49 CFR Part 172, Subpart F) or is 
carrying material listed as a select agent or toxin in 
42 CFR part 73. 
There are a great variety of vehicles in Class C. 
Some rather large Class C vehicles may require 
more skill and knowledge to operate than do the 
smaller ones. However, the licensing category is 
based principally on the type of cargo carried. 
Because of the seriousness of an accident involving 
hazardous material or human passengers, the safe 
operation of even the smaller vehicles in Class C 
requires special knowledge and the drivers of these 
vehicles must have a CDL. 
STATE OPTIONS: Some states may include more 
drivers and vehicles in their CDL programs. For 
example, in some states, a CDL may be required for 
buses designed to carry fewer than 16 passengers. 
Going beyond the federal standard is acceptable 
and the state will need to decide which battery of 
tests applies to these drivers, or develop a new 
battery. 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-1  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
CDL Endorsements & Restrictions 
Endorsements 
All commercial drivers who drive certain types of 
vehicles or haul certain types of cargo must add 
endorsements to their CDL license and/or 
Commercial Learner’s Permit (CLP) to show that 
they have the specialized knowledge required for 
these operations. There are six kinds of CDL 
endorsements that may be required, depending on 
the vehicle or type of cargo.   
NOTE:  The only endorsements that may be 
added to a Commercial Learner’s Permit (CLP) 
are: - Passenger (P); - School bus (S); and - Tank vehicle (N). 
Double and Triple Trailers (T). Many drivers who 
are qualified to drive Class A vehicles may wish to 
pull double or triple trailers. Research shows that 
considerable additional knowledge and skill is 
necessary to safely pull double and triple trailers in 
various traffic conditions and driving environments. 
Consequently, adding the endorsement to the 
licenses of Class A drivers is necessary if they wish 
to pull double or triple trailers. A special knowledge 
examination on the problems associated with pulling 
multiple trailers must be passed. 
Tank Vehicle (N).  Drivers of any commercial motor 
vehicle that is designed to transport any liquid or 
gaseous materials within a tank or tanks having an 
individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons 
and an aggregate rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or 
more that is either permanently or temporarily 
attached to the vehicle or the chassis must obtain this 
endorsement.  Applies to Class A, B and C (only 
applicable to Class C if the vehicle is hauling 
hazardous materials) vehicles. Liquids in bulk cause 
driving control problems because the cargo is heavy, 
prone to shifting, and has a high center of gravity. 
These drivers must pass a special knowledge 
examination on the problems posed by large volume 
liquid cargos to add the endorsement to their 
CDL/CLP. 
Passengers (P). Drivers who wish to drive a vehicle 
having a design capacity to carry 16 or more people, 
including the driver, must add a passenger 
endorsement to their CDL/CLP. They must pass a 
special
 knowledge 
examination 
on safety 
considerations when transporting passengers and 
must pass skills tests in a passenger vehicle. The 
endorsement applies to applicants who wish to drive 
a bus in any class (A, B, or C). 
Hazardous Materials (H). Any driver, regardless of 
the vehicle Class/Group (A, B, or C) who wishes to 
haul any material that has been designated as 
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to 
be placarded under subpart F of 49 CFR part 172; or 
any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or 
toxin 42 CFR Part 73 must add a hazardous 
materials endorsement to their CDL. S/he must pass 
a special written examination on how to recognize, 
handle, and transport hazardous materials. 
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) 
and the US Department of Transportation require 
background checks on commercial drivers who are 
certified to transport hazardous materials.  The 
background checks include a review of criminal, 
immigration and FBI records.  If the driver is found 
to represent a security threat, TSA will notify the 
person and the state will deny issuance of an 
endorsement. 
Combination Hazardous Materials and Tank 
Vehicle (X). Drivers of tank vehicles who haul 
hazardous materials or waste in amounts requiring 
placards must add an X endorsement to their CDL, 
showing that they have passed the special 
knowledge examinations for both tank vehicles and 
hazardous materials. 
School Buses (S). Drivers who wish to drive a 
school bus, must add a school bus endorsement to 
their CDL/CLP. They must pass a special knowledge 
examination on safety considerations when 
transporting passengers in a school bus and must 
pass skills tests in a school bus. The endorsement 
applies to applicants who wish to drive a school bus 
in any class (A, B, or C). 
In addition to these six required endorsements, 
states may add special endorsements of their 
own as they see fit. 
Restrictions 
Restrictions may be added to Commercial Driver 
Licenses/Permits based upon the type of vehicle and 
equipment that the driver uses for the Skills Test. 
There are ten standardized restriction codes. 
NOTE:  If a CLP is issued with a Passenger (P) or a 
School Bus (S) endorsement, it must also contain a 
(P) – No passengers in a CMV bus restriction.   
If a CLP is issued with a Tanker (N) endorsement, it 
must also contain a (X) – No cargo in a CMV tank 
vehicle.  
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-2  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
(E) - No manual transmission. If an applicant 
performs the skills test in a vehicle equipped with an 
automatic transmission, the State must indicate on 
the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted from 
operating a CMV equipped with a manual 
transmission.  For the purposes of the skills test and 
the restriction, an automatic transmission includes 
any transmission not operating fully on the gear shift 
and clutch principle. 
(K) - Intrastate only:    If an applicant certifies their 
status as either Non-Excepted Intrastate or 
Excepted Intrastate, the state must indicate on the 
CDL, if issued, that person is restricted from 
operating  a CMV in interstate commerce.  States 
may impose this restriction for reasons other than 
those specified above. 
(L) - No Air brake equipped CMV:   If an applicant 
does not take or fails the air brake component of the 
knowledge test, or performs the skills test in a 
vehicle not equipped with air brakes, the State must 
indicate on the CLP or CDL, if issued, that the 
person is restricted from operating a CMV equipped 
with any type of air brakes.  For the purposes of the 
skills test and the restriction, air brakes include any 
braking system operating fully or partially on the air 
brake principle. 
(M) - No Class A passenger vehicle:  If an 
applicant applying for a passenger endorsement 
performs the skills test in a passenger vehicle 
requiring a Group B CDL, the State must indicate on 
the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted from 
operating a passenger vehicle requiring a Group A 
CDL. 
(N) - No Class A and B passenger vehicle:  If an 
applicant applying for a passenger endorsement 
performs the skills test in a passenger vehicle 
requiring a Group C CDL, the State must indicate on 
the CDL, if issued, that the person is restricted from 
operating a passenger vehicle requiring a Group A 
or B CDL 
(O) - No tractor trailer CMV:  If an applicant 
performs the skills test in a combination vehicle for 
a Group A CDL with the power unit and towed unit 
connected with a pintle hook or other non-fifth wheel 
connection, the State must indicate on the CDL, if 
issued, that the person is restricted from operating 
a tractor-trailer combination connected by a fifth 
wheel that requires a Group A CDL.    
An applicant who passes a skills test using a 
combination vehicle that is NOT a Truck Tractor 
Semi-Trailer combination, but is otherwise 
equipped with a fifth wheel, will be issued a CDL 
with an “O” restriction.  
(P) - No passengers in CMV bus:   A CLP holder 
with a P endorsement is prohibited from operating a 
CMV carrying passengers, other than Federal/State 
auditors and inspectors, test examiners, other 
trainees, and the CDL holder accompanying the 
CLP holder as prescribed by § CFR 383.25(a)(1) of 
this part. 
A CLP holder with a S endorsement is prohibited 
from operating a school bus with  passengers, other 
than Federal/State auditors and inspectors, test 
examiners, other trainees, and the CDL holder 
accompanying the CLP holder as prescribed by § 
CFR 383.25(a)(1) of this part.  
(V) - Medical Variance:  If the State is notified 
according to § 383.73(o)(3) that the driver has been 
issued a medical variance, the State must indicate 
the existence of such a medical variance on the 
CDLIS driver record and the CDL document, if 
issued, using the restriction code ‘‘V’’ to indicate 
there is information about a medical variance on the 
CDLIS driver record. 
(X) - No cargo in CMV tank vehicle:  A CLP holder 
with an N endorsement may only operate an empty 
tank vehicle and is prohibited from operating any 
tank vehicle that previously contained hazardous 
materials that has not been purged of any residue. 
(Z) - No full air brake equipped CMV:  If an 
applicant performs the skills test in a vehicle 
equipped with air over hydraulic brakes, the State 
must indicate on the CDL, if issued, that the person 
is restricted from operating a CMV equipped with 
any braking system operating fully on the air brake 
principle.  For the purposes of the skills test and the 
restriction, air over hydraulic brakes includes any 
braking system operating partially on the air brake 
and partially on the hydraulic brake principle. 
Any additional jurisdictional restrictions that apply to 
the CLP driving privilege. 
To Get a CDL or CLP 
To get a CDL or CLP, you must pass knowledge and 
skills tests. This manual will help you pass the tests, 
however, it is not a substitute for a truck driver 
training class or program. Formal training is the 
most reliable way to learn the many special skills 
required for safely driving a large commercial 
vehicle and becoming a professional driver in the 
trucking industry.  Figure 1.1 helps you determine if 
you need a CDL 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-3  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
Figure 1.1 
NOTE:  A bus may be Class A, B, or C depending on whether the GVWR is over 26,001 pounds or is a combination vehicle. 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-4  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
1.1 – Commercial Driver License Tests 
1.1.1 – Knowledge Tests 
You will have to take one or more knowledge tests, 
depending on what class of license and what 
endorsements you need. The CDL knowledge tests 
include: 
The general knowledge test, taken by all 
applicants. 
The passenger transport test, taken by all bus 
driver applicants. 
The air brakes test, which you must take if your 
vehicle has air brakes, including air over hydraulic 
brakes. 
The combination vehicles test, which is required 
if you want to drive combination vehicles. 
The hazardous materials test, required if you 
want to haul hazardous materials as defined in 49 
CFR 383.5.  In order to obtain this endorsement 
you are also required to pass a Transportation 
Security Administration (TSA) background check. 
The tank vehicle test, required if you want to haul 
any  liquid or gaseous materials  in a tank or tanks 
having an individual rated capacity of more than 
119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of 
1,000 gallons or more that is either permanently or 
temporarily attached to the vehicle or chassis 
The doubles/triples test, required if you want to 
pull double or triple trailers. 
The School Bus test, required if you want to drive 
a school bus. 
1.1.2 – Skills Tests 
If you pass the required knowledge test(s), you can 
take the CDL skills testwhen you are eligible. The 
CDL Skills Test consists of three segments:   
Vehicle inspection, basic vehicle control, and on
road driving. You must take the segments in the 
order listed and must pass each one before moving 
to the next.  You must take these tests in the type of 
vehicle for which you wish to be licensed.  Any 
vehicle that has components marked or labeled 
cannot be used for the CDL Skills Test. 
Vehicle Inspection. You will be tested to see if you 
know whether your vehicle is safe to drive. You will 
be asked to do a Vehicle inspection of your vehicle.  
You must point to/touch and name the item you are 
inspecting and explain to the examiner what you 
would inspect and why.  
Basic Vehicle Control. You will be tested on your 
skill to control the vehicle. You will be asked to move 
your vehicle forward, backward, and turn it within a 
defined area. These areas may be marked with 
traffic lanes, cones, barriers, or something similar. 
The examiner will tell you how each control test is to 
be done.  
On-road Test. You will be tested on your skill to 
safely drive your vehicle in a variety of traffic 
situations. The situations may include left and right 
turns, intersections, railroad crossings, curves, up 
and down grades, single or multi-lane roads, 
streets, or highways. Special test procedures apply 
to railroad crossings in Florida.The examiner will tell 
you where to drive.  
Figure 1.2 details which sections of this manual you 
should study for each particular class of license and 
for each endorsement. 
What Sections Should You Study? 
LICENSE 
TYPE 
ENDORSEMENT 
Class A 
Class B 
Class C 
Hazardous Materials 
1 
X X X      
Double / Triple 
Tank Vehicles 
Passenger 
School Bus 
2 
X X X  X X X  
3 
X X X      
Sections to Study 
4       
X  
5* X X X  X    
6 
X    
X X   
7     
X    
8      
9    
X   
X  
10        
X   
11 X X X    
X 
X X 
12 X X X    
X X 
13 X X X    
X X 
*Study section 5 if you plan to operate vehicles 
equipped with air brakes. 
Figure 1.2 – What to Study 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-5  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
1.2 – Medical Documentation 
Requirements 
Starting January 30, 2012 and no later than January 
30, 2014, if you are applying for a CDL Permit; or 
are renewing, upgrading, adding endorsements to a 
CDL; or transferring a CDL from another state, you 
are required to provide information to your State 
Driver’s License Agency (SDLA) regarding the type 
of commercial motor vehicle operation you drive in 
or expect to drive in with your CDL. Drivers 
operating in certain types of commerce will be 
required to submit a current medical examiner’s 
certificate and/or any medical variance documents 
that you have been issued (i.e. Vision, Skills 
Performance or Diabetic waivers, or other 
exemptions) to your SDLA to obtain a “certified” 
medical status as part of your driving record. You 
must contact your State Driver Licensing Agency 
(SDLA) to obtain information regarding the 
requirement for submitting these documents. 
If you are required to have a ”certified” medical 
status and fail to provide and keep up-to-date your 
medical examiner’s certificate you become ”not
certified” and may lose your CDL.   
For the purpose of complying with the new 
requirements for medical certification, it is important 
to know how you are using the CMV. The following 
information will help you decide how to self-certify: 
1.2.1 – Interstate or Intrastate Commerce 
Do you, or will you, use a CDL to operate a CMV in 
interstate or intrastate commerce? 
Interstate commerce is when you drive a CMV: 
From one State to another State or a foreign 
country; 
Between two places within a State, but during part 
of the trip, the CMV crosses into another State or 
foreign country; or 
Between two places within a State, but the cargo or 
passengers are part of a trip that began or will end 
in another State or foreign country. 
Intrastate commerce is when you drive a CMV 
within a State and you do not meet any of the 
descriptions above for interstate commerce. 
If you operate in both intrastate commerce and 
interstate commerce, you must choose interstate 
commerce. 
1.2.2 – Inter/Intrastate Commerce: Status Non
excepted or Excepted?  
Once you decide whether you will operate in 
interstate commerce or intrastate commerce, 
you must decide whether you will operate (or expect 
to operate) in a non-excepted or excepted status. 
This decision will tell you to which of the four types 
of commerce you must self-certify. 
Interstate Commerce: 
You operate in excepted interstate commerce 
when you drive a CMV in interstate commerce only 
for the following excepted activities: 
To transport school children and/or school staff 
between home and school; 
As Federal, State or local government employees; 
To transport human corpses or sick or injured 
persons; 
Fire truck or rescue vehicle drivers during 
emergencies and other related activities; 
Primarily in the transportation of propane winter 
heating fuel when responding to an emergency 
condition requiring immediate response such as 
damage to a propane gas system after a storm or 
flooding; 
In Response to a pipeline emergency condition 
requiring immediate response such as a pipeline 
leak or rupture; 
In custom harvesting on a farm or to transport farm 
machinery and supplies used in the custom 
harvesting operation to and from a farm or to 
transport custom harvested crops to storage or 
market; 
Beekeeper in the seasonal transportation of bees; 
Controlled and operated by a farmer, but is not a 
combination vehicle (power unit and towed unit), 
and is used to transport agricultural products, farm 
machinery or farm supplies (no placardable 
hazardous materials) to and from a farm and within 
150 air-miles of the farm; 
As a private motor carrier of passengers for non
business purposes; or 
To transport migrant workers. 
If you answered yes to one or more of the above 
activities as the only operation in which you drive, 
you operate in excepted interstate commerce and 
do not need a Federal medical examiner’s 
certificate. 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-6  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
If you answered no to all of the above activities, you 
operate in non-excepted interstate commerce 
and are required to provide a current medical 
examiner’s certificate (49 CFR 391.45),commonly 
referred to as a medical certificate or DOT card, to 
your State Driver Licensing Agency (SDLA).  Most 
CDL holders who drive CMVs in interstate 
commerce 
are 
commerce drivers. 
If
non-excepted 
interstate 
 you operate in both excepted interstate 
commerce and non-excepted interstate 
commerce, you must choose non-excepted 
interstate commerce to be qualified to operate in 
both types of interstate commerce. 
Intrastate Commerce: 
You operate in excepted Intrastate commerce 
when you drive a CMV only in intrastate commerce 
activities for which your State of licensure has 
determined do not require you to meet the State’s 
medical certification requirements.  (contact your 
SDLA about their requirements). 
You operate in non-excepted intrastate 
commerce when you drive a CMV only in intrastate 
commerce and are required to meet your State of 
licensure’s medical certification requirements 
(contact your SDLA about their requirements). 
If 
you operate in both excepted intrastate 
commerce and non-excepted intrastate 
commerce, you must choose non-excepted 
intrastate commerce. 
1.2.3 – Self-Certification Statements 
When completing an application for your CDL, you 
will be required to check the box next to the 
statement that describes your status.  The actual 
statements on your application may vary from those 
shown below: 
 Interstate non-excepted: I certify that I operate 
or expect to operate in interstate commerce, 
that I am subject to and meet the Federal DOT 
medical card requirements under 49 CFR part 
391; and that I am required to obtain a medical 
examiner’s certificate. 
 Interstate excepted: I certify that I operate or 
expect to operate in interstate commerce, but 
engage exclusively in transportation or 
operations excepted under 49 CFR §§390.3(f), 
391.2, 391.68 or 398.3 from all or parts of the 
qualification requirements of 49 CFR part 391; 
and that  I am not required to obtain a medical 
examiner’s certificate. 
 Intrastate non-excepted: I certify that I operate 
or expect to operate entirely in intrastate 
commerce, that I am subject to and meet the 
medical requirements for my State; and that I 
am required to obtain a medical examiner’s 
certificate. 
 Intrastate excepted: I certify that I operate or 
expect to operate entirely in intrastate 
commerce, that I am not subject to the medical 
requirements for my State; and that I am not 
required to obtain a medical examiner’s 
certificate. 
1.3 - CDL Disqualifications 
1.3.1 – General 
You may not drive a commercial motor vehicle if 
you are disqualified for any reason. Circumstances 
causing disqualification are listed in Chapter 
322.61, Florida Statutes. They include but are not 
limited to: 
1.3.2 – Alcohol, Leaving the Scene of an 
Accident, and Commission of a Felony 
It is illegal to operate a CMV if your blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) is .04% or more. If you operate 
a CMV, you shall be deemed to have given your 
consent to alcohol testing. 
You will lose your CDL for at least one year for a first 
offense for: 
Driving a CMV if your blood alcohol concentration 
is .04% or higher. 
Driving a CMV under the influence of alcohol. 
Refusing to undergo blood alcohol testing. 
Driving a CMV while under the influence of a 
controlled substance. 
Leaving the scene of an accident involving a CMV. 
Committing a felony involving the use of a CMV. 
Driving a CMV when the CDL is suspended. 
Causing a fatality through negligent operation of a 
CMV. 
You will lose your CDL for at least three years if the 
offense occurs while you are operating a CMV that 
is placarded for hazardous materials.  
You will lose your CDL for life for a second offense.  
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-7  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
You will lose your CDL for life if you use a CMV to 
commit a felony involving controlled substances. 
You will be put out-of-service for 24 hours if you 
have any detectable amount of alcohol under .04%. 
1.3.3 – Serious Traffic Violations 
Serious traffic violations are excessive speeding (15 
mph or more above the posted limit), reckless 
driving, improper or erratic lane changes, following 
a vehicle too closely, traffic offenses committed in a 
CMV in connection with fatal traffic accidents, 
driving a CMV without obtaining a CDL or having a 
CDL in the driver’s possession, and driving a CMV 
without the proper class of CDL and/or 
endorsements. 
You will lose your CDL: 
For at least 60 days if you have committed two 
serious traffic violations within a three-year period 
involving a CMV. 
For at least 120 days for three or more serious 
traffic violations within a three-year period involving 
a CMV. 
1.3.4 – Violation of Out-of-Service Orders   
You will lose your CDL: 
[For at least 90 days if you have committed your 
first violation of an out-of-service order. 
For at least one year if you have committed two 
violations of an out-of-service order in a ten-year 
period. 
For at least three years if you have committed 
three or more violations of an out-of-service order 
in a ten-year period]. 
1.3.5 – Railroad-highway Grade Crossing 
Violations 
You will lose your CDL: 
For at least 60 days for your first violation. 
For at least 120 days for your second violation 
within a three-year period. 
For at least one year for your third violation within a 
three-year period. 
These violations include violation of a federal, state 
or local law or regulation pertaining to one of the 
following six offenses at a railroad-highway grade 
crossing: 
For drivers who are not required to always stop, 
failing to stop before reaching the crossing if the 
tracks are not clear. 
For drivers who are not required to always stop, 
failing to slow down and check that the tracks are 
clear of an approaching train. 
For drivers who are always required to stop, failing 
to stop before driving onto the crossing. 
For all drivers failing to have sufficient space to 
drive completely through the crossing without 
stopping.  
For all drivers failing to obey a traffic control device 
or the directions of an enforcement official at the 
crossing. 
For all drivers failing to negotiate a crossing 
because of insufficient undercarriage clearance. 
1.3.6 – Hazardous Materials Endorsement 
Background Check and Disqualifications 
If you require a hazardous materials endorsement 
you will be required to submit your fingerprints and 
be subject to a background check. 
You will be denied or you will lose your hazardous 
materials endorsement if you: 
Are not a lawful permanent resident of the United 
States. 
Renounce your United States citizenship. 
Are wanted or under indictment for certain felonies. 
Have a conviction in military or civilian court for 
certain felonies. 
Have been adjudicated as lacking mental capacity 
or have been involuntarily committed to a mental 
health facility as specified in §1572.109. 
Are considered to pose a security threat as 
determined by the Transportation Security 
Administration. 
The background check procedures vary from 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction.  Your licensing agency 
will provide you with all the information you need to 
complete the required TSA background check 
procedures.  
Florida CDL’s with a hazardous materials 
endorsement are issued for a period of 4 years 
and may be renewed up to 1 year before they 
expire. Drivers holding a CDL with a hazardous 
materials endorsement are encouraged to renew 
early to avoid ineligibility for transporting 
hazardous materials while awaiting results of their 
security checks. 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-8  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
A background check fee of $91.00 is charged to 
customers for new or renewed hazardous 
materials endorsements, in addition to other fees 
for CDL issuance. Information and on-line forms to 
begin the application process for Florida CDL 
hazardous materials endorsement can be found at 
www.flhsmv.gov/Hazmat. 
1.3.7 – Traffic Violations in Your Personal 
Vehicle 
The Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act 
(MCSIA) of 1999 requires a CDL holder to be 
disqualified from operating a commercial motor 
vehicle if the CDL holder has been convicted of 
certain types of moving violations in their personal 
vehicle.
If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is 
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to violations 
of traffic control laws (other than parking violations) 
you will also lose your CDL driving privileges. 
If your privilege to operate your personal vehicle is 
revoked, cancelled, or suspended due to alcohol, 
controlled substance or felony violations, you will 
lose your CDL for 1 year.  If you are convicted of a 
second violation in your personal vehicle or CMV 
you will lose your CDL for life. 
If your license to operate your personal vehicle is 
revoked, cancelled, or suspended you may not 
obtain a “hardship” license to operate a CMV.  
1.4 – Other CDL Rules 
There are other federal and state rules that affect 
drivers operating CMVs in all states. Among them 
are: 
You cannot have more than one license. If you 
break this rule, a court may fine you up to $5,000 
or put you in jail and keep your home state license 
and return any others. 
You must notify your employer within 30 days of 
conviction for any traffic violations (except parking). 
This is true no matter what type of vehicle you 
were driving. 
You must notify your motor vehicle licensing 
agency within 30 days if you are convicted in any 
other jurisdiction of any traffic violation (except 
parking). This is true no matter what type of vehicle 
you were driving. 
You must notify the Department of Highway Safety 
and Motor Vehicles within 30 days if you are 
convicted in any other jurisdiction of any traffic 
violation (except parking). This is true no matter 
what type of vehicle you were driving. The written 
notification must be mailed to Bureau of Driver 
Records, Neil Kirkman Building, 2900 Apalachee 
Parkway, Mail Stop 91, Tallahassee, Florida 
32399-0575. 
You must notify your employer within two business 
days if your license is suspended, revoked, or 
canceled, or if you are disqualified from driving. 
You must give your employer information on all 
driving jobs you have held for the past 10 years. 
You must do this when you apply for a commercial 
driving job. 
No one can drive a commercial motor vehicle 
without a CDL. A court may fine you up to $5,000 
or put you in jail for breaking this rule. 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-9  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
If you have a hazardous materials endorsement 
you must notify and surrender your hazardous 
materials endorsement to the state that issued 
your CDL within 24 hours of any conviction or 
indictment in any jurisdiction, civilian or military, for, 
or found not guilty by reason of insanity of a 
disqualifying crime listed in 49 CFR 1572.103; who 
is adjudicated as lacking mental capacity or have 
been involuntarily committed to a mental institution 
as specified in 49 CFR 1572.109; or who 
renounces his or her U. S. citizenship; 
Your employer may not let you drive a commercial 
motor vehicle if you have more than one license or 
if you’re CDL is suspended or revoked. A court 
may fine the employer up to $5,000 or put him/her 
in jail for breaking this rule. 
All states are connected to one computerized 
system to share information about CDL drivers. 
The states will check on drivers' accident records 
to be sure that drivers do not have more than one 
CDL. 
You are not allowed to hold a mobile telephone to 
conduct a voice communication or dial a mobile 
telephone by pressing more than a single button 
when driving. 
You are not allowed to send or read text messages 
while driving. 
You must be properly restrained by a safety belt 
at all times while operating a commercial motor 
vehicle.  The safety belt design holds the driver 
securely behind the wheel during a crash, 
helping the driver to control the vehicle and 
reduces the chance of serious injury or death.  If 
you do not wear a safety belt, you are four times 
more likely to be fatally injured if you are thrown 
from the vehicle. 
Your state may have additional rules that you 
must also obey. 
If your license to operate your personal vehicle is 
revoked, cancelled, or suspended you may not 
obtain a “hardship” license to operate a CMV. 
Florida CDL holders are not eligible to elect 
completion of a driver improvement school to avoid 
assessment of points for traffic tickets, regardless 
of whether the violation was committed in a CMV.  
To obtain a Florida Commercial Driver’s License 
you must: 
Be a resident of Florida. 
Be at least 18 years of age to drive intrastate and 
21 years of age to drive interstate. You must be at 
least 21 years of age to qualify for the hazardous 
materials endorsement. 
Hold a Florida Class E License. 
Surrender any and all other driver licenses issued 
by Florida or any other state. 
Not be under suspension, revocation, cancellation 
or disqualification in Florida or any other state. 
Submit a valid medical report or card, if you are 
required to hold this document. In Florida, this 
requirement includes public and private school bus 
drivers who must meet medical standards of the 
Florida Board of Education that are equal to the 
federal medical standards for most other CDL 
holders. All CDL holders must keep the status of 
their medical certifications up-to date in their driver 
records as described at: 
http://flhsmv.gov/ddl/cdlmedicalcert.html. 
Provide proof of your social security number such 
as the social security card itself or your W-2 Form 
(photocopies are not acceptable). 
Pass all required tests and pay the proper license 
fee. 
Must be in compliance with the vision and Physical 
requirements as stated in Part 391 of the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations Handbook. 
CDL Exemptions: 
Drivers of the following vehicles which otherwise 
meet the definition of a commercial vehicle are 
exempt by law from having to obtain a CDL:  
Military Vehicles – Vehicles operated by members 
of the armed forces for military purposes. 
Authorized Emergency Vehicles – These vehicles 
include, but are not limited to, ambulances, law 
enforcement and fire trucks equipped with red and 
blue lights and audible devices (sirens). 
Farmers – Transporting farm supplies, farm 
machinery or agriculture products, to or from the 
owners farm. Not used in the operations of a 
common or contract motor carrier; and used 
within 150 miles of the farmer’s farm. 
Farmer, as defined by Florida Statute 322.01(18), 
means a person who grows agricultural products, 
including aqua cultural, horticultural and forestry 
products, and, except as provided herein, 
employees of such persons. The term does not 
include employees whose primary purpose of 
employment is the operation of motor vehicles. 
Recreation Vehicles – A vehicle that is primarily 
designed as temporary living quarters for 
recreational, camping, or travel use, which either 
has its own motive power or is mounted on or 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-10  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
drawn by another vehicle. Recreational vehicle
type units, must comply with the length and width 
provisions of Florida Statutes, 316.515, when 
traveling on the public roadways of this state. 
Please see Florida Statutes 320.01 for more 
information regarding recreation vehicles. 
Straight Trucks – as defined in 316.033, Florida 
Statutes, that are exclusively transporting the 
driver’s own tangible personal property that is not 
for sale. 
Fees: 
Fees for a commercial driver licenses will be $75 for 
the initial issue and renewal. Fees for customers 
who have received school bus training and are 
applying for employment or employed by a public or 
non-public school system will be $48 for the initial 
issue and $48 for renewal. Each endorsement is $7. 
There is a $10 fee for written re-exams and a $20 
fee for driving re-exams. 
1.5 – International Registration Plan 
International Fuel Tax Agreement 
If you operate a CDL required vehicle in interstate 
commerce, the vehicle, with few exceptions, is 
required to be registered under the International 
Registration Plan (IRP) and the International Fuel 
Tax Agreement (IFTA). These federally mandated 
programs provide for the equitable collection and 
distribution of vehicle license fees and motor fuels 
taxes for vehicles traveling throughout the 48 
contiguous United States and 10 Canadian 
provinces. 
Under the IRP, jurisdictions must register 
apportioned vehicles which includes issuing license 
plates and cab cards or proper credentials, 
calculate, collect and distribute IRP fees, audit 
carriers for accuracy of reported distance and fees 
and enforce IRP requirements. 
Registrant responsibilities under the Plan include 
applying for IRP registration with base jurisdiction, 
providing proper documentation for registration, 
paying appropriate IRP registration fees, properly 
displaying registration credentials, maintaining 
accurate distance records, and making records 
available for jurisdiction review. 
The basic concept behind IFTA is to allow a licensee 
(motor carrier) to license in a base jurisdiction for 
the reporting and payment of motor fuel use taxes. 
Under the IFTA, a licensee is issued one set of 
credentials which will authorize operations through 
all IFTA member jurisdictions.  The fuel use taxes 
collected pursuant to the IFTA are calculated based 
on the number of miles (kilometers) traveled and the 
number of gallons (liters) consumed in the member 
jurisdictions. The licensee files one quarterly tax 
return with the base jurisdiction by which the 
licensee will report all operations through all IFTA 
member jurisdictions. 
It is the base jurisdiction's responsibility to remit the 
taxes collected to other member jurisdictions and to 
represent the other member jurisdictions in the tax 
collection process, including the performance of 
audits. 
An IFTA licensee must retain records to support the 
information reported on the IFTA quarterly tax return 
The IRP registrant and the IFTA licensee may be 
the vehicle owner or the vehicle operator. 
The requirement for acquiring IRP plates for a 
vehicle and IFTA license for a  motor carrier is 
determined by the definitions from the IRP Plan and 
the IFTA for Qualified Vehicle and Qualified Motor 
Vehicle: 
For purposes of IRP: 
A Qualified Vehicle is (except as provided below) 
any Power Unit that is used or 
intended for use in two or more Member 
Jurisdictions and that is used for the transportation 
of persons for hire or designed, used, or maintained 
primarily for the transportation of property, and: 
(i) 
has two Axles and a gross Vehicle weight or 
registered gross Vehicle weight in 
(ii) excess of 26,000 pounds (11,793.401 
kilograms), or 
(iii) has three or more Axles, regardless of weight, 
or 
(iv) is used in combination, when the gross Vehicle 
weight of such combination exceeds 26,000 
pounds (11,793.401 kilograms). 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-11  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
While similar, the Qualified Motor Vehicle in IFTA 
means a motor vehicle used, designed, or 
maintained for transportation of persons or property 
and: 
1) Having two axles and a gross vehicle weight 
or registered gross vehicle weight exceeding 
26,000 pounds or 11,797 kilograms; or  
2) Is used in combination, when the weight of 
such combination exceeds 26,000 pounds or 
11,797 kilograms gross vehicle or registered 
gross vehicle weight.  Qualified Motor Vehicle 
does not include recreational vehicles. 
If the vehicle you operate is registered under IRP 
and you are a motor carrier licensed under IFTA, 
then you are required to comply with the 
mandatory record keeping requirements for 
operating the vehicle. A universally accepted 
method of capturing this information is through the 
completion of an Individual Vehicle Distance 
Record (IVDR), sometimes times referred to as a 
Driver Trip Report. This document reflects the 
distance traveled and fuel purchased for a vehicle 
that operates interstate under apportioned (IRP) 
registration and IFTA fuel tax credentials. 
Although the actual format of the IVDR may vary, the 
information that is required for proper record keeping 
does not. 
In order to satisfy the requirements for Individual 
Vehicle Distance Records, these documents must 
include the following information: 
Distance 
Per Article IV of the IRP Plan 
(i) Date of trip (starting and ending)  
(ii) Trip origin and destination – City and State          
or Province 
(iii) Route(s) of travel  
(iv) Beginning and ending odometer or 
hubometer reading of the trip 
(v) Total distance traveled 
(vi) In-Jurisdiction distance  
(vii) Power unit number or vehicle identification 
number. 
Fuel 
Per Section P560 of the IFTA Procedures Manual 
.300 An acceptable receipt or invoice must  
include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
.005 Date of purchase 
.010 Seller's name and address 
.015 Number of gallons or liters purchased; 
.020 Fuel type 
.025 Price per gallon or liter or total amount of  
sale 
.030 Unit number or other unique vehicle  
identifier 
.035 Purchaser's name 
An example of an IVDR that must be completed in 
its entirety for each trip can be found in Figure 1 
below.  Each individual IVDR should be filled out for 
only one vehicle.  The rules to follow when trying to 
determine how and when to log an odometer 
reading are the following: 
 At the beginning of the day 
 When leaving the state or province 
 At the end of the trip/day 
Not only do the trips need to be logged, but the fuel 
purchases need to be documented as well.  You must 
obtain a receipt for all fueling and include it with your 
completed IVDR. 
Make sure that any trips that you enter are always 
filled out in descending order and that your trips 
include all state/provinces that you traveled through 
on your route. 
There are different routes that a driver may take, 
and most of the miles may be within one state or 
province.  Whether or not the distance you travel is 
primarily in one jurisdiction or spread among several 
jurisdictions, all information for the trip must be 
recorded. This includes the dates, the routes, 
odometer readings and fuel purchases.  
By 
completing this document in full and keeping all 
records required by both the IRP and the IFTA, you 
will have ensured that you and your company are in 
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-12  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
compliance with all State and Provincial laws 
surrounding fuel and distance record keeping 
requirements. 
The IVDR serves as the source document for the 
calculation of fees and taxes that are payable to the 
jurisdictions in which the vehicle is operated, so 
these original records must be maintained for a 
minimum of four years. 
In addition, these records are subject to audit by the 
taxing jurisdictions. Failure to maintain complete 
and accurate records could result in fines, penalties 
and suspension or revocation of IRP registrations 
and IFTA  licenses.  
For additional information on the IRP and the 
requirements related to the IRP, contact your base 
jurisdiction motor vehicle department or IRP, Inc. 
the official repository for the IRP.  
Additional 
information can be found on the IRP, Inc. website at 
www.irponline.org.  There is a training video on the 
website home page available in English, Spanish 
and French 
For additional information on IFTA and the 
requirements related to IFTA, contact the 
appropriate agency in your base jurisdiction.  You 
will
 also find useful information about the 
Agreement at the official repository of IFTA at 
http://www.iftach.org/index.php.   
Figure 1 – Individual Vehicle Mileage & Fuel Record (Example)
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-13  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
Section 1 - Introduction 
Page 1-12 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 2  
DRIVING SAFELY 
This Section Covers 
• Vehicle Inspection 
• Basic Control of Your Vehicle 
• Shifting Gears 
• Seeing 
• Communicating 
• Space Management 
• Controlling Your Speed 
• Seeing Hazards 
• Distracted Driving 
• Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage 
• Night Driving & Driver Fatigue 
• Driving in Fog 
• Winter Driving 
• Hot Weather Driving 
• Railroad-highway Crossings 
• Mountain Driving 
• Driving Emergencies 
• Antilock Braking Systems 
• Skid Control and Recovery 
• Accident Procedures 
• Fires 
• Alcohol, Other Drugs, and Driving 
• Hazardous Materials Rules 
This section contains knowledge and safe driving 
information that all commercial drivers should know. 
You must pass a test on this information to get a 
CDL. This section does not have specific 
information on air brakes, combination vehicles, 
doubles, or passenger vehicles. When preparing for 
the Vehicle Inspection Test, you must review the 
material in Section 11 in addition to the information 
in this section. This section does have basic 
information on hazardous materials (HazMat) that 
all drivers should know. If you need a HazMat 
endorsement, you should study Section 9. 
2.1 – Vehicle Inspection 
2.1.1 – Why Inspect 
Safety is the most important reason you inspect 
your vehicle, safety for yourself and for other road 
users. 
A vehicle defect found during an inspection could 
save you problems later. You could have a 
breakdown on the road that will cost time and 
dollars, or even worse, a crash caused by the 
defect. 
Federal and state laws require that drivers inspect 
their vehicles. Federal and state inspectors also 
may inspect your vehicles. If they judge the vehicle 
to be unsafe, they will put it "out of service" until it is 
fixed. 
2.1.2 – Types of Vehicle Inspection 
Vehicle Inspection. A Vehicle inspection will help 
you find problems that could cause a crash or 
breakdown. 
During a Trip. For safety you should: 
Watch gauges for signs of trouble. 
Use your senses to check for problems (look, 
listen, smell, feel). 
Check critical items when you stop: 
Tires, wheels and rims. 
Brakes. 
Lights and reflectors. 
Brake and electrical connections to trailer. 
Trailer coupling devices. 
Cargo securement devices. 
After-trip Inspection and Report. You should do 
an after-trip inspection at the end of the trip, day, or 
tour of duty on each vehicle you operated. It may 
include filling out a vehicle condition report listing 
any problems you find. The inspection report helps 
a motor carrier know when the vehicle needs 
repairs. 
2.1.3 – What to Look For 
Tire Problems 
Too much or too little air pressure. 
Bad wear. You need at least 4/32-inch tread depth 
in every major groove on front tires. You need 2/32 
inch on other tires. No fabric should show through 
the tread or sidewall. 
Cuts or other damage. 
Tread separation. 
Dual tires that come in contact with each other or 
parts of the vehicle. 
Mismatched sizes. 
Radial and bias-ply tires used together. 
Cut or cracked valve stems. 
Re-grooved, recapped, or retreaded tires on the 
front wheels of a bus are prohibited. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-1  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Wheel and Rim Problems 
Damaged rims. 
Rust around wheel nuts may mean the nuts are 
loose--check tightness. After a tire has been 
changed, stop a short while later and re-check 
tightness of nuts. 
Missing clamps, spacers, studs, or lugs means 
danger. 
Mismatched, bent, or cracked lock rings are 
dangerous. 
Wheels or rims that have had welding repairs are 
not safe. 
Bad Brake Drums or Shoes 
Cracked drums. 
Shoes or pads with oil, grease, or brake fluid on 
them. 
Shoes worn dangerously thin, missing, or broken. 
Steering System Defects 
Missing nuts, bolts, cotter keys, or other parts. 
Bent, loose, or broken parts, such as steering 
column, steering gear box, or tie rods. 
If power steering equipped, check hoses, pumps, 
and fluid level; check for leaks. 
Steering wheel play of more than 10 degrees 
(approximately 2 inches movement at the rim of a 
20-inch steering wheel) can make it hard to steer. 
Figure 2.1 
Suspension System Defects. The suspension 
system holds up the vehicle and its load. It keeps 
the axles in place. Therefore, broken suspension 
parts can be extremely dangerous. Look for: 
Spring hangers that allow movement of axle from 
proper position. See Figure 2.2. 
Figure 2.2 
Cracked or broken spring hangers. 
Missing or broken leaves in any leaf spring. If one
fourth or more are missing, it will put the vehicle 
"out of service", but any defect could be 
dangerous. See Figure 2.3. 
Figure 2.3 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-2  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Broken leaves in a multi-leaf spring or leaves that 
have shifted so they might hit a tire or other part. 
Leaking shock absorbers. 
Torque rod or arm, u-bolts, spring hangers, or 
other axle positioning parts that are cracked, 
damaged, or missing. 
Air suspension systems that are damaged and/or 
leaking. See Figure 2.4. 
Figure 2.4 
Any loose, cracked, broken, or missing frame 
members.  
Exhaust System Defects. A broken exhaust 
system can let poison fumes into the cab or sleeper 
berth. Look for: 
Loose, broken, or missing exhaust pipes, mufflers, 
tailpipes, or vertical stacks. 
Loose, broken, or missing mounting brackets, 
clamps, bolts, or nuts. 
Exhaust system parts rubbing against fuel system 
parts, tires, or other moving parts of vehicle. 
Exhaust system parts that are leaking. 
Emergency Equipment. Vehicles must be 
equipped with emergency equipment. Look for: 
Fire extinguisher(s).  
Spare electrical fuses (unless equipped with circuit 
breakers). 
Warning devices for parked vehicles:   three 
reflective triangles or at least 6 fusees or 3 liquid 
burning flares). 
Cargo (Trucks). You must make sure the truck is 
not overloaded and the cargo is balanced and 
secured before each trip. If the cargo contains 
hazardous materials, you must inspect for proper 
papers and placarding. 
2.1.4 – CDL Vehicle Inspection Test 
In order to obtain a CDL you will be required to pass 
a Vehicle inspection test. You will be tested to see if 
you know whether your vehicle is safe to drive. You 
will be asked to do a Vehicle inspection of your 
vehicle.  You must point to/touch and name the item 
you are inspecting and explain to the examiner what 
you would inspect and why. The following seven
step inspection method should be useful. 
2.1.5 – Seven-step Inspection Method 
Method of Inspection. You should do a Vehicle 
inspection the same way each time so you will learn 
all the steps and be less likely to forget something.  
Approaching the Vehicle. Notice general 
condition. Look for damage or vehicle leaning to one 
side. Look under the vehicle for fresh oil, coolant, 
grease, or fuel leaks. Check the area around the 
vehicle for hazards to vehicle movement (people, 
other vehicles, objects, low-hanging wires, limbs, 
etc.). 
Vehicle Inspection Guide 
Step 1: Vehicle Overview 
Review Last Vehicle Inspection Report. Drivers 
may have to make a vehicle inspection report in 
writing each day. The motor carrier must repair any 
items in the report that affect safety and certify on 
the report that repairs were made or were 
unnecessary. You must sign the report only if 
defects were noted and certified to be repaired or 
not needed to be repaired. 
Step 2: Check Engine Compartment 
Check That the Parking Brakes Are On and/or 
Wheels Chocked. 
You may have to raise the hood, tilt the cab (secure 
loose things so they don't fall and break something), 
or open the engine compartment door.  
Check the following: 
Engine oil level. 
Coolant level in radiator; condition of hoses. 
Power steering fluid level; hose condition (if so 
equipped). 
Windshield washer fluid level. 
Battery fluid level, connections and tie downs 
(battery may be located elsewhere) 
Automatic transmission fluid level (may require 
engine to be running). 
Check belts for tightness and excessive wear 
(alternator, water pump, air compressor)--learn 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-3  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
how much "give" the belts should have when 
adjusted right, and check each one. 
Leaks in the engine compartment (fuel, coolant, oil, 
power steering fluid, hydraulic fluid, battery fluid). 
Cracked, worn electrical wiring insulation.  
Lower and secure hood, cab, or engine 
compartment door. 
Step 3: Start Engine and Inspect Inside the Cab 
Get In and Start Engine 
Make sure parking brake is on. 
Put gearshift in neutral (or "park" if automatic). 
Start engine; listen for unusual noises. 
If equipped, check the Anti-lock Braking System 
(ABS) indicator lights.  Light on dash should come 
on and then turn off.  If it stays on the ABS is not 
working properly.  For trailers only, if the yellow 
light on the left rear of the trailer stays on, the ABS 
is not working properly.    
Look at the Gauges 
Oil pressure. Should come up to normal within 
seconds after engine is started. See Figure 2.5 
Air pressure. Pressure should build from 50 to 90 
psi within 3 minutes.  Build air pressure to governor 
cut-out (usually around 120 – 140 psi.  Know your 
vehicle’s requirements.   
Ammeter and/or voltmeter. Should be in normal 
range(s). 
Coolant temperature. Should begin gradual rise to 
normal operating range. 
Engine oil temperature. Should begin gradual rise 
to normal operating range. 
Warning lights and buzzers. Oil, coolant, charging 
circuit warning, and antilock brake system lights 
should go out right away.  
Check Condition of Controls. Check all of the 
following for looseness, sticking, damage, or 
improper setting: 
Steering wheel. 
Clutch. 
Accelerator ("gas pedal"). 
Brake controls. 
Foot brake. 
Trailer brake (if vehicle has one). 
Parking brake. 
Retarder controls (if vehicle has them). 
Transmission controls. 
Interaxle differential lock (if vehicle has one). 
Horn(s). 
Windshield wiper/washer. 
Lights. 
Headlights. 
Dimmer switch. 
Turn signal. 
Four-way flashers. 
Parking, 
clearance, 
switch(es). 
identification, 
marker 
Figure 2.5 
Check Mirrors and Windshield. Inspect mirrors 
and windshield for cracks, dirt, illegal stickers, or 
other obstructions to seeing clearly. Clean and 
adjust as necessary. 
Check Emergency Equipment 
Check for safety equipment: 
Spare electrical fuses (unless vehicle has circuit 
breakers). 
Three red reflective triangles, 6 fusees or 3 liquid 
burning flares. 
Properly charged and rated fire extinguisher. 
Check for optional items such as: 
Chains (where winter conditions require). 
Tire changing equipment. 
List of emergency phone numbers 
Accident reporting kit (packet). 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-4  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Check Safety Belt.  Check that the safety belt is 
securely mounted, adjusts; latches properly and is 
not ripped or frayed. 
Step 4: Turn Off Engine and Check Lights 
Make sure the parking brake is set, turn off the 
engine, and take the key with you. Turn on 
headlights (low beams) and four-way emergency 
flashers, and get out of the vehicle. 
Step 5: Do Walk-around Inspection 
Go to front of vehicle and check that low beams 
are on and both of the four-way flashers are 
working. 
Push dimmer switch and check that high beams 
work. 
Turn off headlights and four-way emergency 
flashers. 
Turn on parking, clearance, side-marker, and 
identification lights. 
Turn on right turn signal, and start walk-around 
inspection. 
General 
Walk around and inspect. 
Clean all lights, reflectors, and glass as you go 
along. 
Left Front Side 
Driver's door glass should be clean. 
Door latches or locks should work properly. 
Left front wheel. 
Condition of wheel and rim--missing, bent, broken 
studs, clamps, lugs, or any signs of misalignment. 
Condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stem and 
cap OK, no serious cuts, bulges, or tread wear. 
Use wrench to test rust-streaked lug nuts, indicating 
looseness. 
Hub oil level OK, no leaks. 
Left front suspension. 
Condition of spring, spring hangers, shackles,  
u-bolts. 
Shock absorber condition. 
Left front brake. 
Condition of brake drum or disc. 
Condition of hoses. 
Front 
Condition of front axle. 
Condition of steering system. 
No loose, worn, bent, damaged or missing parts. 
Must grab steering mechanism to test for 
looseness. 
Condition of windshield. 
Check for damage and clean if dirty. 
Check windshield wiper arms for proper spring 
tension. 
Check wiper blades for damage, "stiff" rubber, and 
securement. 
Lights and reflectors. 
Parking, clearance, and identification lights clean, 
operating, and proper color (amber at front). 
Reflectors clean and proper color (amber at front). 
Right front turn signal light clean, operating, and 
proper color (amber or white on signals facing 
forward). 
Right Side 
Right front: check all items as done on left front. 
Primary and secondary safety cab locks engaged 
(if cab-over-engine design). 
Right fuel tank(s). 
Securely mounted, not damaged, or leaking. 
Fuel crossover line secure. 
Tank(s) contain enough fuel. 
Cap(s) on and secure. 
Condition of visible parts. 
Rear of engine--not leaking. 
Transmission--not leaking. 
Exhaust system--secure, not leaking, not touching 
wires, fuel, or air-lines. 
Frame and cross members--no bends or cracks.  
Air-lines and electrical wiring--secured against 
snagging, rubbing, wearing. 
Spare tire carrier or rack not damaged (if so 
equipped). 
Spare tire and/or wheel securely mounted in rack. 
Spare tire and wheel adequate (proper size, 
properly inflated). 
Cargo securement (trucks). 
Cargo properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc. 
Header board adequate, secure (if required). 
Side boards, stakes strong enough, free of damage, 
properly set in place (if so equipped). 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-5  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Canvas or tarp (if required) properly secured to 
prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of mirrors. 
If oversize, all required signs (flags, lamps, and 
reflectors) safely and properly mounted and all 
required permits in driver's possession. 
Curbside cargo compartment doors in good 
condition, securely closed, latched/locked and 
required security seals in place. 
Right Rear 
Condition of wheels and rims--no missing, bent, or 
broken spacers, studs, clamps, or lugs. 
Condition of tires--properly inflated, valve stems 
and caps OK, no serious cuts, bulges, tread wear, 
tires not rubbing each other, and nothing stuck 
between them. 
Tires same type, e.g., not mixed radial and bias 
types. 
Tires evenly matched (same sizes). 
Wheel bearing/seals not leaking. 
Suspension. 
Condition of spring(s), spring hangers, shackles, 
and u-bolts. 
Axle secure. 
Powered axle(s) not leaking lube (gear oil). 
Condition of torque rod arms, bushings. 
Condition of shock absorber(s). 
If retractable axle equipped, check condition of lift 
mechanism. If air powered, check for leaks. 
Condition of air ride components. 
Brakes. 
Brake adjustment. 
Condition of brake drum(s) or discs. 
Condition of hoses--look for any wear due to 
rubbing. 
Lights and reflectors. 
Side-marker lights clean, operating, and proper 
color (red at rear, others amber). 
Side-marker reflectors clean and proper color (red 
at rear, others amber). 
Rear 
Lights and reflectors. 
Rear clearance and identification lights clean, 
operating, and proper color (red at rear). 
Reflectors clean and proper color (red at rear). 
Taillights clean, operating, and proper color (red at 
rear). 
Right rear turn signal operating, and proper color 
(red, yellow, or amber at rear). 
License plate(s) present, clean, and secured. 
Splash guards present, not damaged, properly 
fastened, not dragging on ground, or rubbing tires. 
Cargo secure (trucks). 
Cargo properly blocked, braced, tied, chained, etc. 
Tailboards up and properly secured. 
End gates free of damage, properly secured in 
stake sockets. 
Canvas or tarp (if required) properly secured to 
prevent tearing, billowing, or blocking of either the 
rearview mirrors or rear lights. 
If over-length, or over-width, make sure all signs 
and/or additional lights/flags are safely and 
properly mounted and all required permits are in 
driver's possession. 
Rear doors securely closed, latched/locked. 
Left Side 
Check all items as done on right side, plus: 
Battery(ies) (if not mounted in engine 
compartment). 
Battery box(es) securely mounted to vehicle. 
Box has secure cover. 
Battery(ies) secured against movement. 
Battery(ies) not broken or leaking. 
Fluid in battery(ies) at proper level (except 
maintenance-free type). 
Cell caps present and securely tightened (except 
maintenance-free type). 
Vents in cell caps free of foreign material (except 
maintenance-free type). 
Step 6: Check Signal Lights 
Get In and Turn Off Lights 
Turn off all lights. 
Turn on stop lights (apply trailer hand brake or 
have a helper put on the brake pedal). 
Turn on left turn signal lights. 
Get Out and Check Lights 
Left front turn signal light clean, operating and 
proper color (amber or white on signals facing the 
front). 
Left rear turn signal light and both stop lights clean, 
operating, and proper color (red, yellow, or amber). 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-6  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Get In Vehicle 
Turn off lights not needed for driving. 
Check for all required papers, trip manifests, 
permits, etc. 
Secure all loose articles in cab (they might interfere 
with operation of the controls or hit you in a crash). 
Start the engine. 
Step 7: Start the Engine and Check 
Test for Hydraulic Leaks. If the vehicle has 
hydraulic brakes, pump the brake pedal three times. 
Then apply firm pressure to the pedal and hold for 
five seconds. The pedal should not move. If it does, 
there may be a leak or other problem. Get it fixed 
before driving. If the vehicle has air brakes, do the 
checks described in Sections 5 and 6 of this manual. 
Brake System 
Test Parking Brake(s) 
Fasten safety belt 
Set parking brake (power unit only). 
Release trailer parking brake (if applicable). 
Place vehicle into a low gear. 
Gently pull forward against parking brake to make 
sure the parking brake holds. 
Repeat the same steps for the trailer with trailer 
parking brake set and power unit parking brakes 
released (if applicable). 
If it doesn't hold vehicle, it is faulty; get it fixed. 
Test Service Brake Stopping Action 
Go about five miles per hour. 
Push brake pedal firmly 
"Pulling" to one side or the other can mean brake 
trouble. 
Any unusual brake pedal "feel" or delayed stopping 
action can mean trouble. 
If you find anything unsafe during the Vehicle 
inspection, get it fixed. Federal and state laws forbid 
operating an unsafe vehicle. 
2.1.6 – Inspection during a Trip 
Check Vehicle Operation Regularly 
You should check: 
Instruments. 
Air pressure gauge (if you have air brakes). 
Temperature gauges. 
Pressure gauges. 
Ammeter/voltmeter. 
Mirrors. 
Tires. 
Cargo, cargo covers. 
Lights, etc  
If you see, hear, smell, or feel anything that might 
mean trouble, check it out. 
Safety Inspection. Drivers of trucks and truck 
tractors when transporting cargo must inspect the 
securement of the cargo within the first 50 miles of 
a trip and every 150 miles or every three hours 
(whichever comes first) after. 
2.1.7 – After-trip Inspection and Report 
You may have to make a written report each day on 
the condition of the vehicle(s) you drove. Report 
anything affecting safety or possibly leading to 
mechanical breakdown. 
Subsection 2.1 
Test Your Knowledge 
The vehicle inspection report tells the motor carrier 
about problems that may need fixing. Keep a copy 
of your report in the vehicle for one day. That way, 
the next driver can learn about any problems you 
have found. 
1. What is the most important reason for doing a 
vehicle inspection? 
2. What things should you check during a trip? 
3. Name some key steering system parts. 
4. Name some suspension system defects. 
5. What three kinds of emergency equipment must 
you have? 
6. What is the minimum tread depth for front tires? 
For other tires? 
7. Name some things you should check on the 
front of your vehicle during the walk around 
inspection. 
8. What should wheel bearing seals be checked 
for? 
9. How many red reflective triangles should you 
carry? 
10. How do you test hydraulic brakes for leaks? 
11. Why put the starter switch key in your pocket 
during the Vehicle inspection? 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-7  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 2.1. 
2.2 – Basic Control of Your Vehicle 
To drive a vehicle safely, you must be able to control 
its speed and direction. Safe operation of a 
commercial vehicle requires skill in: 
Accelerating. 
Steering. 
Stopping. 
Backing safely. 
Fasten your seatbelt when on the road. Apply the 
parking brake when you leave your vehicle. 
2.2.1 – Accelerating 
Don't roll back when you start. You may hit 
someone behind you. If you have a manual 
transmission vehicle, partly engage the clutch 
before you take your right foot off the brake. Put on 
the parking brake whenever necessary to keep from 
rolling back. Release the parking brake only when 
you have applied enough engine power to keep 
from rolling back. On a tractor-trailer equipped with 
a trailer brake hand valve, the hand valve can be 
applied to keep from rolling back. 
Speed up smoothly and gradually so the vehicle 
does not jerk. Rough acceleration can cause 
mechanical damage. When pulling a trailer, rough 
acceleration can damage the coupling. 
Speed up very gradually when traction is poor, as in 
rain or snow. If you use too much power, the drive 
wheels may spin. You could lose control. If the drive 
wheels begin to spin, take your foot off the 
accelerator. 
2.2.2 – Steering 
Hold the steering wheel firmly with both hands. Your 
hands should be on opposite sides of the wheel. If 
you hit a curb or a pothole (chuckhole), the wheel 
could pull away from your hands unless you have a 
firm hold. 
2.2.3 – Stopping 
Push the brake pedal down gradually. The amount 
of brake pressure you need to stop the vehicle will 
depend on the speed of the vehicle and how quickly 
you need to stop. Control the pressure so the 
vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you have a 
manual transmission, push the clutch in when the 
engine is close to idle. 
2.2.4 – Backing Safely 
Because you cannot see everything behind your 
vehicle, backing is always dangerous. Avoid 
backing whenever you can. When you park, try to 
park so you will be able to pull forward when you 
leave. When you have to back, here are a few 
simple safety rules: 
Start in the proper position. 
Look at your path. 
Use mirrors on both sides. 
Back slowly. 
Back and turn toward the driver's side whenever 
possible. 
Use a helper whenever possible. 
These rules are discussed in turn below. 
Start in the Proper Position. Put the vehicle in the 
best position to allow you to back safely. This 
position will depend on the type of backing to be 
done. 
Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel 
before you begin. Get out and walk around the 
vehicle. Check your clearance to the sides and 
overhead, in and near the path your vehicle will 
take. 
Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside 
mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the 
vehicle and check your path if you are unsure. 
Back Slowly. Always back as slowly as possible. 
Use the lowest reverse gear. That way you can 
more easily correct any steering errors. You also 
can stop quickly if necessary. 
Back and Turn Toward the Driver's Side. Back to 
the driver's side so that you can see better. Backing 
toward the right side is very dangerous because you 
can't see as well. If you back and turn toward the 
driver's side, you can watch the rear of your vehicle 
by looking out the side window. Use driver-side 
backing--even if it means going around the block to 
put your vehicle in this position. The added safety is 
worth it. 
Use a Helper. Use a helper when you can. There 
are blind spots you can't see. That's why a helper is 
important. The helper should stand near the back of 
your vehicle where you can see the helper. Before 
you begin backing, work out a set of hand signals 
that you both understand. Agree on a signal for 
"stop." 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-8  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
2.3 – Shifting Gears 
Correct shifting of gears is important. If you can't get 
your vehicle into the right gear while driving, you will 
have less control. 
2.3.1 – Manual Transmissions 
Basic Method for Shifting Up. Most heavy 
vehicles with unsynchronized manual transmissions 
require double clutching to change gears.  If 
equipped with a synchronized manual transmission, 
double clutching is NOT required This is the basic 
method: 
Release accelerator, push in clutch and shift to 
neutral at the same time. 
Release clutch. 
Let engine and gears slow down to the rpm 
required for the next gear (this takes practice). 
Push in clutch and shift to the higher gear at the 
same time. 
Release clutch and press accelerator at the same 
time. 
Shifting gears using double clutching requires 
practice.  If you remain too long in neutral, you may 
have difficulty putting the vehicle into the next gear. 
If so, don't try to force it. Return to neutral, release 
clutch, increase engine speed to match road speed, 
and try again. 
Knowing When to Shift Up. There are two ways of 
knowing when to shift: 
Use Engine Speed (rpm). Study the driver's 
manual for your vehicle and learn the operating rpm 
range. Watch your tachometer, and shift up when 
your engine reaches the top of the range. (Some 
newer vehicles use "progressive" shifting:  the rpm 
at which you shift becomes higher as you move up 
in the gears. Find out what's right for the vehicle you 
will operate.) 
Use Road Speed (mph). Learn what speeds each 
gear is good for. Then, by using the speedometer, 
you'll know when to shift up. 
With either method, you may learn to use engine 
sounds to know when to shift. 
Basic Procedures for Shifting Down 
Release accelerator, push in clutch, and shift to 
neutral at the same time. 
Release clutch. 
Press accelerator, increase engine and gear speed 
to the rpm required in the lower gear. 
Push in clutch and shift to lower gear at the same 
time. 
Release clutch and press accelerator at the same 
time. 
Downshifting, like upshifting, requires knowing 
when to shift. Use either the tachometer or the 
speedometer and downshift at the right rpm or 
road speed. 
Special conditions where you should downshift 
are: 
Before Starting Down a Hill. Slow down and shift 
down to a speed that you can control without using 
the brakes hard. Otherwise the brakes can overheat 
and lose their braking power. 
Downshift before starting down the hill. Make sure 
you are in a low enough gear, usually lower than the 
gear required to climb the same hill. 
Before Entering a Curve. Slow down to a safe 
speed, and downshift to the right gear before 
entering the curve. This lets you use some power 
through the curve to help the vehicle be more stable 
while turning. It also allows you to speed up as soon 
as you are out of the curve. 
2.3.2 – Multi-speed Rear Axles and Auxiliary 
Transmissions 
Multi-speed rear axles and auxiliary transmissions 
are used on many vehicles to provide extra gears. 
You usually control them by a selector knob or 
switch on the gearshift lever of the main 
transmission. There are many different shift 
patterns. Learn the right way to shift gears in the 
vehicle you will drive. 
2.3.3 – Automatic Transmissions 
Some vehicles have automatic transmissions. You 
can select a low range to get greater engine braking 
when going down grades. The lower ranges prevent 
the transmission from shifting up beyond the 
selected gear (unless the governor rpm is 
exceeded). It is very important to use this braking 
effect when going down grades. 
2.3.4 – Retarders 
Some vehicles have "retarders." Retarders help 
slow a vehicle, reducing the need for using your 
brakes. They reduce brake wear and give you 
another way to slow down. There are four basic 
types of retarders (exhaust, engine, hydraulic, and 
electric). All retarders can be turned on or off by the 
driver. On some vehicles the retarding power can be 
adjusted. When turned "on," retarders apply their 
braking power (to the drive wheels only) whenever 
you let up on the accelerator pedal all the way. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-9  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Because these devices can be noisy, be sure you 
know where their use is permitted. 
Caution. When your drive wheels have poor 
traction, the retarder may cause them to skid. 
Therefore, you should turn the retarder off 
whenever the road is wet, icy, or snow covered. 
Subsections 2.2 and 2.3 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Why should you back toward the driver's 
side? 
If stopped on a hill, how can you start 
moving without rolling back? 
When backing, why is it important to use a 
helper? 
What's the most important hand signal that 
you and the helper should agree on? 
What are the two special conditions where 
you should downshift? 
When should you downshift automatic 
transmissions? 
Retarders keep you from skidding when the 
road is slippery. True or False? 
What are the two ways to know when to 
shift? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.2 and 2.3. 
2.4 – Seeing 
To be a safe driver you need to know what's going 
on all around your vehicle. Not looking properly is a 
major cause of accidents. 
2.4.1 – Seeing Ahead 
All drivers look ahead; but many don't look far 
enough ahead. 
Importance of Looking Far Enough Ahead. 
Because stopping or changing lanes can take a lot 
of distance, knowing what the traffic is doing on all 
sides of you is very important. You need to look well 
ahead to make sure you have room to make these 
moves safely. 
How Far Ahead to Look. Most good drivers look at 
least 12 to 15 seconds ahead. That means looking 
ahead the distance you will travel in 12 to 15 
seconds. At lower speeds, that's about one block. 
At highway speeds it's about a quarter of a mile. If 
you're not looking that far ahead, you may have to 
stop too quickly or make quick lane changes. 
Looking 12 to 15 seconds ahead doesn't mean not 
paying attention to things that are closer. Good 
drivers shift their attention back and forth, near and 
far. Figure 2.6 illustrates how far to look ahead. 
Figure 2.6 
Look for Traffic. Look for vehicles coming onto the 
highway, into your lane, or turning. Watch for brake 
lights from slowing vehicles. By seeing these things 
far enough ahead, you can change your speed, or 
change lanes if necessary to avoid a problem.  If a 
traffic light has been green for a long time it will 
probably change before you get there.  Start slowing 
down and be ready to stop. 
2.4.2 – Seeing to the Sides and Rear 
It's important to know what's going on behind and to 
the sides. Check your mirrors regularly. Check more 
often in special situations. 
Mirror Adjustment. Mirror adjustment should be 
checked prior to the start of any trip and can only be 
checked accurately when the trailer(s) are straight. 
You should check and adjust each mirror to show 
some part of the vehicle. This will give you a 
reference point for judging the position of the other 
images. 
Regular Checks. You need to make regular checks 
of your mirrors to be aware of traffic and to check 
your vehicle. 
Traffic. Check your mirrors for vehicles on either 
side and in back of you. In an emergency, you may 
need to know whether you can make a quick lane 
change. Use your mirrors to spot overtaking 
vehicles. There are "blind spots" that your mirrors 
cannot show you. Check your mirrors regularly to 
know where other vehicles are around you, and to 
see if they move into your blind spots. 
Check Your Vehicle. Use the mirrors to keep an 
eye on your tires. It's one way to spot a tire fire. If 
you're carrying open cargo, you can use the mirrors 
to check it. Look for loose straps, ropes, or chains. 
Watch for a flapping or ballooning tarp.  
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-10  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Special Situations. Special situations require more 
than regular mirror checks. These are lane 
changes, turns, merges, and tight maneuvers. 
Lane Changes. You need to check your mirrors to 
make sure no one is alongside you or about to pass 
you. Check your mirrors: 
Before you change lanes to make sure there is 
enough room. 
After you have signaled, to check that no one has 
moved into your blind spot. 
Right after you start the lane change, to double
check that your path is clear. 
After you complete the lane change. 
Turns. In turns, check your mirrors to make sure the 
rear of your vehicle will not hit anything. 
Merges. When merging, use your mirrors to make 
sure the gap in traffic is large enough for you to 
enter safely. 
Tight Maneuvers. Any time you are driving in close 
quarters, check your mirrors often. Make sure you 
have enough clearance. 
How to Use Mirrors. Use mirrors correctly by 
checking them quickly and understanding what you 
see. 
When you use your mirrors while driving on the 
road, check quickly. Look back and forth between 
the mirrors and the road ahead. Don't focus on the 
mirrors for too long. Otherwise, you will travel quite 
a distance without knowing what's happening 
ahead. 
Many large vehicles have curved (convex, 
"fisheye," "spot," "bug-eye") mirrors that show a 
wider area than flat mirrors. This is often helpful. 
But everything appears smaller in a convex mirror 
than it would if you were looking at it directly. 
Things also seem farther away than they really are. 
It's important to realize this and to allow for it. 
Figure 2.7 shows the field of vision using a convex 
mirror. 
2.5 – Communicating 
2.5.1 – Signal Your Intentions 
Other drivers can't know what you are going to do 
until you tell them. 
Signaling what you intend to do is important for 
safety. Here are some general rules for signaling. 
Figure 2.7 
Turns. There are three good rules for using turn 
signals: 
Signal early. Signal well before you turn. It is the 
best way to keep others from trying to pass you. 
Signal continuously. You need both hands on the 
wheel to turn safely. Don't cancel the signal until 
you have completed the turn. 
Cancel your signal. Don't forget to turn off your turn 
signal after you've turned (if you don't have self
canceling signals). 
Lane Changes. Put your turn signal on before 
changing lanes. Change lanes slowly and smoothly. 
That way a driver you didn't see may have a chance 
to honk his/her horn, or avoid your vehicle. 
Slowing Down. Warn drivers behind you when you 
see you'll need to slow down. A few light taps on the 
brake pedal -- enough to flash the brake lights -- 
should warn following drivers. Use the four-way 
emergency flashers for times when you are driving 
very slowly or are stopped. Warn other drivers in 
any of the following situations: 
Trouble Ahead. The size of your vehicle may 
make it hard for drivers behind you to see hazards 
ahead. If you see a hazard that will require slowing 
down, warn the drivers behind by flashing your 
brake lights. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-11  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Tight Turns. Most car drivers don't know how 
slowly you have to go to make a tight turn in a 
large vehicle. Give drivers behind you warning by 
braking early and slowing gradually. 
Stopping on the Road. Truck and bus drivers 
sometimes stop in the roadway to unload cargo or 
passengers, or to stop at a railroad crossing. Warn 
following drivers by flashing your brake lights. 
Don't stop suddenly. 
Driving Slowly. Drivers often do not realize how 
fast they are catching up to a slow vehicle until 
they are very close. If you must drive slowly, alert 
following drivers by turning on your emergency 
flashers if it is legal. (Laws regarding the use of 
flashers differ from one state to another. Check the 
laws of the states where you will drive.) 
Don't Direct Traffic. Some drivers try to help out 
others by signaling when it is safe to pass. You 
should not do this. You could cause an accident. 
You could be blamed and it could cost you many 
thousands of dollars. 
2.5.2 – Communicating Your Presence 
Other drivers may not notice your vehicle even 
when it's in plain sight. To help prevent accidents, 
let them know you're there. 
When Passing. Whenever you are about to pass a 
vehicle, pedestrian, or bicyclist, assume they don't 
see you. They could suddenly move in front of you. 
When it is legal, tap the horn lightly or, at night, flash 
your lights from low to high beam and back. And, 
drive carefully enough to avoid a crash even if they 
don't see or hear you. 
When It's Hard to See. At dawn, dusk, in rain, or 
snow, you need to make yourself easier to see. If 
you are having trouble seeing other vehicles, other 
drivers will have trouble seeing you. Turn on your 
lights. Use the headlights, not just the identification 
or clearance lights. Use the low beams; high beams 
can bother people in the daytime as well as at night. 
When Parked at the Side of the Road. When you 
pull off the road and stop, be sure to turn on the four
way emergency flashers. This is important at night.   
Don't trust the taillights to give warning. Drivers 
have crashed into the rear of a parked vehicle 
because they thought it was moving normally. 
If you must stop on a road or the shoulder of any 
road, you must put out your emergency warning 
devices within ten minutes. Place your warning 
devices at the following locations: 
If you must stop on or by a one-way or divided 
highway, place warning devices 10 feet, 100 feet, 
and 200 feet toward the approaching traffic. See 
Figure 2.8. 
Figure 2.8 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-12  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
If you stop on a two-lane road carrying traffic in both 
directions or on an undivided highway, place 
warning devices within 10 feet of the front or rear 
corners to mark the location of the vehicle and 100 
feet behind and ahead of the vehicle, on the 
shoulder or in the lane you stopped in. See Figure 
2.9. 
Figure 2.9 
Back beyond any hill, curve, or other obstruction 
that prevents other drivers from seeing the vehicle 
within 500 feet. If line of sight view is obstructed due 
to hill or curve, move the rear-most triangle to  
a point back down the road so warning is provided. 
See Figure 2.10.  
Figure 2.10 
When putting out the triangles, hold them between 
yourself and the oncoming traffic for your own 
safety. (So other drivers can see you.) 
Use Your Horn When Needed. Your horn can let 
others know you're there. It can help to avoid a 
crash. Use your horn when needed. However, it can 
startle others and could be dangerous when used 
unnecessarily. 
2.6 – Controlling Speed 
Driving too fast is a major cause of fatal crashes. 
You must adjust your speed depending on driving 
conditions. These include traction, curves, visibility, 
traffic and hills. 
2.6.1 – Stopping Distance 
Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Braking 
Distance = Total Stopping Distance 
Perception distance.  The distance your vehicle 
travels, in ideal conditions; from the time your eyes 
see a hazard until your brain recognizes it.  Keep in 
mind certain mental and physical conditions can 
affect your perception distance.  It can be affected 
greatly depending on visibility and the hazard itself.  
The average perception time for an alert driver is 1¾ 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-13  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
seconds.  At 55 mph this accounts for 142 feet 
traveled.  
Reaction distance.   The distance you will continue 
to travel, in ideal conditions; before you physically 
hit the brakes, in response to a hazard seen ahead.  
The average driver has a reaction time of ¾ second 
to 1 second.  At 55 mph this accounts for 61 feet 
traveled.    
Braking distance.  The distance your vehicle will 
travel, in ideal conditions; while you are braking.  At 
55 mph on dry pavement with good brakes, it can 
take about 216 feet.   
Total stopping distance.  The total minimum 
distance your vehicle has traveled, in ideal 
conditions; with everything considered, including 
perception distance, reaction distance and braking 
distance, until you can bring your vehicle to a 
complete stop.  At 55 mph, your vehicle will travel a 
minimum of 419 feet.  See Figure 2.11. 
Figure 2.11 
The Effect of Speed on Stopping Distance. 
The faster you drive, the greater the impact or 
striking power of your vehicle.  When you double 
your speed from 20 to 40 mph the impact is 4 times 
greater.  The braking distance is also 4 times longer.  
Triple the speed from 20 to 60 mph and the impact 
and braking distance is 9 times greater.  At 60 mph, 
your stopping distance is greater than the length of 
a football field.  Increase the speed to 80 mph and 
the impact and braking distance are 16 times 
greater than at 20 mph.  High speeds greatly 
increase the severity of crashes and stopping 
distances. 
 By slowing down, you can reduce 
braking distance. 
The Effect of Vehicle Weight on Stopping 
Distance. The heavier the vehicle, the more work 
the brakes must do to stop it, and the more heat they 
absorb. But the brakes, tires, springs, and shock 
absorbers on heavy vehicles are designed to work 
best when the vehicle is fully loaded. Empty trucks 
require greater stopping distances because an 
empty vehicle has less traction. 
2.6.2 – Matching Speed to the Road Surface 
You can't steer or brake a vehicle unless you have 
traction. Traction is friction between the tires and the 
road. There are some road conditions that reduce 
traction and call for lower speeds. 
Slippery Surfaces. It will take longer to stop, and it 
will be harder to turn without skidding, when the 
road is slippery. Wet roads can double stopping 
distance. You must drive slower to be able to stop 
in the same distance as on a dry road. Reduce 
speed by about one-third (e.g., slow from 55 to 
about 35 mph) on a wet road. On packed snow, 
reduce speed by a half, or more. If the surface is icy, 
reduce speed to a crawl and stop driving as soon as 
you can safely do so. 
Identifying Slippery Surfaces. Sometimes it's 
hard to know if the road is slippery. Here are some 
signs of slippery roads: 
Shaded Areas. Shady parts of the road will remain 
icy and slippery long after open areas have melted. 
Bridges. When the temperature drops, bridges will 
freeze before the road will. Be especially careful 
when the temperature is close to 32 degrees 
Fahrenheit. 
Melting Ice. Slight melting will make ice wet. Wet 
ice is much more slippery than ice that is not wet. 
Black Ice. Black ice is a thin layer that is clear 
enough that you can see the road underneath it. It 
makes the road look wet. Any time the temperature 
is below freezing and the road looks wet, watch out 
for black ice. 
Vehicle Icing. An easy way to check for ice is to 
open the window and feel the front of the mirror, 
mirror support, or antenna. If there's ice on these, 
the road surface is probably starting to ice up. 
Just After Rain Begins. Right after it starts to 
rain, the water mixes with oil left on the road by 
vehicles. This makes the road very slippery. If the 
rain continues, it will wash the oil away.  
Hydroplaning. In some weather, water or slush 
collects on the road. When this happens, your 
vehicle can hydroplane. It's like water skiing--the 
tires lose their contact with the road and have little 
or no traction. You may not be able to steer or 
brake. You can regain control by releasing the 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-14  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
accelerator and pushing in the clutch. This will slow 
your vehicle and let the wheels turn freely. If the 
vehicle is hydroplaning, do not use the brakes to 
slow down. If the drive wheels start to skid, push in 
the clutch to let them turn freely. 
It does not take a lot of water to cause hydroplaning. 
Hydroplaning can occur at speeds as low as 30 mph 
if there is a lot of water. Hydroplaning is more likely 
if tire pressure is low, or the tread is worn. (The 
grooves in a tire carry away the water; if they aren't 
deep, they don't work well.)  
Road surfaces where water can collect can create 
conditions that cause a vehicle to hydroplane. 
Watch for clear reflections, tire splashes, and 
raindrops on the road. These are indications of 
standing water.  
2.6.3 – Speed and Curves 
Drivers must adjust their speed for curves in the 
road. If you take a curve too fast, two things can 
happen. The tires can lose their traction and 
continue straight ahead, so you skid off the road. Or, 
the tires may keep their traction and the vehicle rolls 
over. Tests have shown that trucks with a high 
center of gravity can roll over at the posted speed 
limit for a curve. 
Slow to a safe speed before you enter a curve. 
Braking in a curve is dangerous because it is easier 
to lock the wheels and cause a skid. Slow down as 
needed. Don't ever exceed the posted speed limit 
for the curve. Be in a gear that will let you accelerate 
slightly in the curve. This will help you keep control. 
2.6.4 – Speed and Distance Ahead 
You should always be able to stop within the 
distance you can see ahead. Fog, rain, or other 
conditions may require that you slowdown to be 
able to stop in the distance you can see. At night, 
you can't see as far with low beams as you can with 
high beams. When you must use low beams, slow 
down. 
2.6.5 – Speed and Traffic Flow 
When you're driving in heavy traffic, the safest 
speed is the speed of other vehicles. Vehicles going 
the same direction at the same speed are not likely 
to run into one another. In many states, speed limits 
are lower for trucks and buses than for cars. It can 
vary as much as 15 mph. Use extra caution when 
you change lanes or pass on these roadways. Drive 
at the speed of the traffic, if you can without going 
at an illegal or unsafe speed. Keep a safe following 
distance. 
The main reason drivers exceed speed limits is to 
save time. But, anyone trying to drive faster than the 
speed of traffic will not be able to save much time. 
The risks involved are not worth it. If you go faster 
than the speed of other traffic, you'll have to keep 
passing other vehicles. This increases the chance 
of a crash, and it is more tiring. Fatigue increases 
the chance of a crash. Going with the flow of traffic 
is safer and easier. 
2.6.6 – Speed on Downgrades 
Your vehicle's speed will increase on downgrades 
because of gravity. Your most important objective is 
to select and maintain a speed that is not too fast for 
the: 
Total weight of the vehicle and cargo. 
Length of the grade. 
Steepness of the grade. 
Road conditions. 
Weather. 
If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign indicating 
"Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed the speed 
shown. Also, look for and heed warning signs 
indicating the length and steepness of the grade. 
You must use the braking effect of the engine as the 
principal way of controlling your speed on 
downgrades. The braking effect of the engine is 
greatest when it is near the governed rpms and the 
transmission is in the lower gears. Save your brakes 
so you will be able to slow or stop as required by 
road and traffic conditions. Shift your transmission 
to a low gear before starting down the grade and 
use the proper braking techniques. Please read 
carefully the section on going down long, steep 
downgrades safely in "Mountain Driving." 
2.6.7 – Roadway Work Zones 
Speeding traffic is the number one cause of injury 
and death in roadway work zones. Observe the 
posted speed limits at all times when approaching 
and driving through a work zone. Watch your 
speedometer, and don’t allow your speed to creep 
up as you drive through long sections of road 
construction. Decrease your speed for adverse 
weather or road conditions. Decrease your speed 
even further when a worker is close to the roadway. 
Subsections 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
How far ahead does the manual say you 
should look? 
What are two main things to look for ahead? 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-15  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
What's your most important way to see the 
sides and rear of your vehicle? 
What does "communicating" mean in safe 
driving? 
Where should you place reflectors when 
stopped on a divided highway? 
What three things add up to total stopping 
distance? 
If you go twice as fast, will your stopping 
distance increase by two or four times? 
Empty trucks have the best braking. True or 
False? 
What is hydroplaning? 
10. What is "black ice”? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.4, 2.5, and 
2.6. 
2.7 – Managing Space 
To be a safe driver, you need space all around your 
vehicle. When things go wrong, space gives you 
time to think and to take action. 
To have space available when something goes 
wrong, you need to manage space. While this is true 
for all drivers, it is very important for large vehicles. 
They take up more space and they require more 
space for stopping and turning. 
2.7.1 – Space Ahead 
Of all the space around your vehicle, it is the area 
ahead of the vehicle--the space you're driving into --that is most important. 
The Need for Space Ahead. You need space 
ahead in case you must suddenly stop. According 
to accident reports, the vehicle that trucks and 
buses most often run into is the one in front of them. 
The most frequent cause is following too closely. 
Remember, if the vehicle ahead of you is smaller 
than yours, it can probably stop faster than you can. 
You may crash if you are following too closely. 
How Much Space? How much space should you 
keep in front of you? One good rule says you need 
at least one second for each 10 feet of vehicle 
length at speeds below 40 mph. At greater speeds, 
you must add 1 second for safety. For example, if 
you are driving a 40-foot vehicle, you should leave 
4 seconds between you and the vehicle ahead. In a 
60-foot rig, you'll need 6 seconds. Over 40 mph, 
you'd need 5 seconds for a 40-foot vehicle and 7 
seconds for a 60-foot vehicle. See Figure 2.12. 
To know how much space you have, wait until the 
vehicle ahead passes a shadow on the road, a 
pavement marking, or some other clear landmark. 
Then count off the seconds like this: "one thousand- 
and-one, one thousand-and-two" and so on, until 
you reach the same spot. Compare your count with 
the rule of one second for every ten feet of length.  
If you are driving a 40-foot truck and only counted 
up to 2 seconds, you're too close. Drop back a little 
and count again until you have 4 seconds of 
following distance (or 5 seconds, if you're going over 
40 mph). After a little practice, you will know how far 
back you should be. Remember to add 1 second for 
speeds above 40 mph. Also remember that when 
the road is slippery, you need much more space to 
stop. 
Figure 2.12 
2.7.2 – Space Behind 
You can't stop others from following you too closely. 
But there are things you can do to make it safer. 
Stay to the Right. Heavy vehicles are often 
tailgated when they can't keep up with the speed of 
traffic. This often happens when you're going uphill. 
If a heavy load is slowing you down, stay in the right 
lane if you can. Going uphill, you should not pass 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-16  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
another slow vehicle unless you can get around 
quickly and safely. 
Dealing with Tailgaters Safely. In a large vehicle, 
it's often hard to see whether a vehicle is close 
behind you. You may be tailgated: 
When you are traveling slowly. Drivers trapped 
behind slow vehicles often follow closely. 
In bad weather. Many car drivers follow large 
vehicles closely during bad weather, especially 
when it is hard to see the road ahead. 
If you find yourself being tailgated, here are some 
things you can do to reduce the chances of a crash: 
Avoid quick changes. If you have to slow down or 
turn, signal early, and reduce speed very gradually. 
Increase your following distance. Opening up 
room in front of you will help you to avoid having to 
make sudden speed or direction changes. It also 
makes it easier for the tailgater to get around you. 
Don't speed up. It's safer to be tailgated at a low 
speed than a high speed. 
Avoid tricks. Don't turn on your taillights or flash 
your brake lights. Follow the suggestions above. 
2.7.3 – Space to the Sides 
Commercial vehicles are often wide and take up 
most of a lane. Safe drivers will manage what little 
space they have. You can do this by keeping your 
vehicle centered in your lane, and avoid driving 
alongside others. 
Staying Centered in a Lane. You need to keep 
your vehicle centered in the lane to keep safe 
clearance on either side. If your vehicle is wide, you 
have little room to spare. 
Traveling Next to Others. There are two dangers 
in traveling alongside other vehicles: 
Another driver may change lanes suddenly and 
turn into you. 
You may be trapped when you need to change 
lanes. 
Find an open spot where you aren't near other 
traffic. When traffic is heavy, it may be hard to find 
an open spot. If you must travel near other vehicles, 
try to keep as much space as possible between you 
and them. Also, drop back or pull forward so that 
you are sure the other driver can see you. 
Strong Winds. Strong winds make it difficult to stay 
in your lane. The problem is usually worse for lighter 
vehicles. This problem can be especially bad 
coming out of tunnels. Don't drive alongside others 
if you can avoid it. 
2.7.4 – Space Overhead 
Hitting overhead objects is a danger. Make sure you 
always have overhead clearance. 
Don't assume that the heights posted at bridges 
and overpasses are correct. Re-paving or packed 
snow may have reduced the clearances since the 
heights were posted. 
The weight of a cargo van changes its height. An 
empty van is higher than a loaded one. That you 
got under a bridge when you were loaded does not 
mean that you can do it when you are empty. 
If you doubt you have safe space to pass under an 
object, go slowly. If you aren't sure you can make 
it, take another route. Warnings are often posted 
on low bridges or underpasses, but sometimes 
they are not. 
Some roads can cause a vehicle to tilt. There can 
be a problem clearing objects along the edge of 
the road, such as signs, trees, or bridge supports. 
Where this is a problem, drive a little closer to the 
center of the road. 
Before you back into an area, get out and check 
for overhanging objects such as trees, branches, 
or electric wires. It's easy to miss seeing them 
while you are backing. (Also check for other 
hazards at the same time.) 
2.7.5 – Space Below 
Many drivers forget about the space under their 
vehicles. That space can be very small when a 
vehicle is heavily loaded. This is often a problem on 
dirt roads and in unpaved yards. Don't take a 
chance on getting hung up. Drainage channels 
across roads can cause the ends of some vehicles 
to drag. Cross such depressions carefully. 
Railroad tracks can also cause problems, 
particularly when pulling trailers with a low 
underneath clearance. Don’t take a chance on 
getting hung up halfway across. 
2.7.6 – Space for Turns 
The space around a truck or bus is important in 
turns. Because of wide turning and off-tracking, 
large vehicles can hit other vehicles or objects 
during turns. 
Right Turns. Here are some rules to help prevent 
right-turn crashes: 
Turn slowly to give yourself and others more time 
to avoid problems. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-17  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
If you are driving a truck or bus that cannot make 
the right turn without swinging into another lane, 
turn wide as you complete the turn. Keep the rear 
of your vehicle close to the curb. This will stop 
other drivers from passing you on the right. 
Don't turn wide to the left as you start the turn. A 
following driver may think you are turning left and 
try to pass you on the right. You may crash into the 
other vehicle as you complete your turn. 
If you must cross into the oncoming lane to make a 
turn, watch out for vehicles coming toward you. 
Give them room to go by or to stop. However, don't 
back up for them, because you might hit someone 
behind you. See Figure 2.13. 
Figure 2.13 
Left Turns. On a left turn, make sure you have 
reached the center of the intersection before you 
start the left turn. If you turn too soon, the left side 
of your vehicle may hit another vehicle because of 
off-tracking. 
If there are two turning lanes, always take the right 
turn lane. Don't start in the inside lane because you 
may have to swing right to make the turn. Drivers on 
your left can be more readily seen. See Figure 2.14. 
Figure 2.14 
2.7.7 – Space Needed to Cross or Enter Traffic 
Be aware of the size and weight of your vehicle 
when you cross or enter traffic. Here are some 
important things to keep in mind. 
Because of slow acceleration and the space large 
vehicles require, you may need a much larger gap 
to enter traffic than you would in a car. 
Acceleration varies with the load. Allow more room 
if your vehicle is heavily loaded. 
Before you start across a road, make sure you can 
get all the way across before traffic reaches you. 
2.8 – Seeing Hazards 
2.8.1 – Importance of Seeing Hazards 
What Is a Hazard? A hazard is any road condition 
or other road user (driver, bicyclist, pedestrian) that 
is a possible danger. For example, a car in front of 
you is headed toward the freeway exit, but his brake 
lights come on and he begins braking hard. This 
could mean that the driver is uncertain about taking 
the off ramp. He might suddenly return to the 
highway. This car is a hazard. If the driver of the car 
cuts in front of you, it is no longer just a hazard; it is 
an emergency. 
Seeing Hazards Lets You Be Prepared. You will 
have more time to act if you see hazards before they 
become emergencies. In the example above, you 
might make a lane change or slow down to prevent 
a crash if the car suddenly cuts in front of you. 
Seeing this hazard gives you time to check your 
mirrors and signal a lane change. Being prepared 
reduces the danger. A driver who did not see the 
hazard until the slow car pulled back on the highway 
in front of him would have to do something very 
suddenly. Sudden braking or a quick lane change is 
much more likely to lead to a crash. 
Learning to See Hazards. There are often clues 
that will help you see hazards. The more you drive, 
the better you can learn to see hazards. This section 
will talk about hazards that you should be aware of.  
2.8.2 – Hazardous Roads 
[Move-Over Laws] 
[The incidents of law enforcement officers, 
emergency medical services, fire department 
personnel and people working on the road are 
being struck while performing duties at the 
roadside are increasing at a frightening pace.  To 
lessen the problem, move-over laws have been 
enacted, which require drivers to slow and change 
lanes when approaching a roadside incident or 
emergency vehicle.  Signs are posted on roadways 
in states that have such laws].   
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-18  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
[When approaching an authorized emergency 
vehicle stopped on the roadside or a work zone, 
you should proceed with caution by slowing and 
yielding the right-of-way by making a lane change 
into a lane not next to that of the authorized 
emergency vehicle or work zone if safety and 
traffic conditions permit.  If a lane change is 
unsafe, slow down and proceed with caution while 
maintaining a safe speed for traffic conditions]. 
Slow down and be very careful if you see any of the 
following road hazards. 
Work Zones. When people are working on the road, 
it is a hazard. There may be narrower lanes, sharp 
turns, or uneven surfaces. Other drivers are often 
distracted and drive unsafely. Workers and 
construction vehicles may get in the way. Drive 
slowly and carefully near work zones. Use your four
way flashers or brake lights to warn drivers behind 
you. 
Drop Off. Sometimes the pavement drops off 
sharply near the edge of the road. Driving too near 
the edge can tilt your vehicle toward the side of the 
road. This can cause the top of your vehicle to hit 
roadside objects (signs, tree limbs). Also, it can be 
hard to steer as you cross the drop off, going off the 
road, or coming back on. 
Foreign Objects. Things that have fallen on the 
road can be hazards. They can be a danger to your 
tires and wheel rims. They can damage electrical 
and brake lines. They can be caught between dual 
tires and cause severe damage. Some obstacles 
that appear to be harmless can be very dangerous. 
For example, cardboard boxes may be empty, but 
they may also contain some solid or heavy material 
capable of causing damage. The same is true of 
paper and cloth sacks. It is important to remain alert 
for objects of all sorts, so you can see them early 
enough to avoid them without making sudden, 
unsafe moves. 
Off Ramps/On Ramps. Freeway and turnpike exits 
can be particularly dangerous for commercial 
vehicles. Off ramps and on ramps often have speed 
limit signs posted. Remember, these speeds may 
be safe for automobiles, but may not be safe for 
larger vehicles or heavily loaded vehicles. Exits that 
go downhill and turn at the same time can be 
especially dangerous. The downgrade makes it 
difficult to reduce speed. Braking and turning at the 
same time can be a dangerous practice. Make sure 
you are going slowly enough before you get on the 
curved part of an off ramp or on ramp. 
2.8.3 – Drivers Who Are Hazards 
In order to protect yourself and others, you must 
know when other drivers may do something 
hazardous. Some clues to this type of hazard are 
discussed below. 
Blocked Vision. People who can't see others are a 
very dangerous hazard. Be alert for drivers whose 
vision is blocked. Vans, loaded station wagons, and 
cars with the rear window blocked are examples. 
Rental trucks should be watched carefully. Their 
drivers are often not used to the limited vision they 
have to the sides and rear of the truck. In winter, 
vehicles with frosted, ice-covered, or snow-covered 
windows are hazards. 
Vehicles may be partly hidden by blind intersections 
or alleys. If you only can see the rear or front end of 
a vehicle but not the driver, then he or she can't see 
you. Be alert because he/she may back out or enter 
into your lane. Always be prepared to stop. 
Delivery Trucks Can Present a Hazard. Packages 
or vehicle doors often block the driver’s vision. 
Drivers of step vans, postal vehicles, and local 
delivery vehicles often are in a hurry and may 
suddenly step out of their vehicle or drive their 
vehicle into the traffic lane. 
Parked Vehicles Can Be Hazards, especially 
when people start to get out of them. Or, they may 
suddenly start up and drive into your way. Watch for 
movement inside the vehicle or movement of the 
vehicle itself that shows people are inside. Watch 
for brake lights or backup lights, exhaust, and other 
clues that a driver is about to move. 
Be careful of a stopped bus. Passengers may cross 
in front of or behind the bus, and they often can't see 
you. 
Pedestrians and Bicyclists Can Also Be 
Hazards. Walkers, joggers, and bicyclists may be 
on the road with their back to the traffic, so they can't 
see you. Sometimes they wear portable stereos 
with headsets, so they can't hear you either. This 
can be dangerous. On rainy days, pedestrians may 
not see you because of hats or umbrellas. They may 
be hurrying to get out of the rain and may not pay 
attention to the traffic. 
Distractions. People who are distracted are 
hazards. Watch for where they are looking. If they 
are looking elsewhere, they can't see you. But be 
alert even when they are looking at you. They may 
believe that they have the right of way. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-19  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Children. Children tend to act quickly without 
checking traffic. Children playing with one another 
may not look for traffic and are a serious hazard. 
Talkers. Drivers or pedestrians talking to one 
another may not be paying close attention to the 
traffic. 
Workers. People working on or near the roadway 
are a hazard clue. The work creates a distraction for 
other drivers and the workers themselves may not 
see you. 
Ice Cream Trucks. Someone selling ice cream is a 
hazard clue. Children may be nearby and may not 
see you. 
Disabled Vehicles. Drivers changing a tire or fixing 
an engine often do not pay attention to the danger 
that roadway traffic is to them. They are often 
careless. Jacked up wheels or raised hoods are 
hazard clues. 
Accidents. Accidents are particularly hazardous. 
People involved in the accident may not look for 
traffic. Passing drivers tend to look at the accident. 
People often run across the road without looking. 
Vehicles may slow or stop suddenly. 
Shoppers. People in and around shopping areas 
are often not watching traffic because they are 
looking for stores or looking into store windows. 
Confused Drivers. Confused drivers often change 
direction suddenly or stop without warning. 
Confusion is common near freeway or turnpike 
interchanges and major intersections. Tourists 
unfamiliar with the area can be very hazardous. 
Clues to tourists include car-top luggage and out-of
state license plates. Unexpected actions (stopping 
in the middle of a block, changing lanes for no 
apparent reason, backup lights suddenly going on) 
are clues to confusion. Hesitation is another clue, 
including driving very slowly, using brakes often, or 
stopping in the middle of an intersection. You may 
also see drivers who are looking at street signs, 
maps, and house numbers. These drivers may not 
be paying attention to you. 
Slow Drivers. Motorists who fail to maintain normal 
speed are hazards. Seeing slow moving vehicles 
early can prevent a crash. Some vehicles, by their 
nature, are slow and seeing them is a hazard clue 
(mopeds, farm machinery, construction machinery, 
tractors, etc.). Some of these will have the "slow 
moving vehicle" symbol to warn you. This is a red 
triangle with an orange center. Watch for it. 
Drivers Signaling a Turn May Be a Hazard. 
Drivers signaling a turn may slow more than 
expected or stop. If they are making a tight turn into 
an alley or driveway, they may go very slowly. If 
pedestrians or other vehicles block them, they may 
have to stop on the roadway. Vehicles turning left 
may have to stop for oncoming vehicles. 
Drivers in a Hurry. Drivers may feel your 
commercial vehicle is preventing them from getting 
where they want to go on time. Such drivers may 
pass you without a safe gap in the oncoming traffic, 
cutting too close in front of you. Drivers entering the 
road may pull in front of you in order to avoid being 
stuck behind you, causing you to brake. Be aware 
of this and watch for drivers who are in a hurry. 
Impaired Drivers. Drivers who are sleepy, have 
had too much to drink, are on drugs, or who are ill 
are hazards. Some clues to these drivers are: 
Weaving across the road or drifting from one side 
to another. 
Leaving the road (dropping right wheels onto the 
shoulder, or bumping across a curb in a turn). 
Stopping at the wrong time (stopping at a green 
light, or waiting for too long at a stop). 
Open window in cold weather. 
Speeding up or slowing down suddenly, driving too 
fast or too slow. 
Be alert for drunk drivers and sleepy drivers late at 
night. 
Driver Body Movement as a Clue. Drivers look in 
the direction they are going to turn. You may 
sometimes get a clue from a driver's head and body 
movements that a driver may be going to make a 
turn, even though the turn signals aren't on. Drivers 
making over-the-shoulder checks may be going to 
change lanes. These clues are most easily seen in 
motorcyclists and bicyclists. Watch other road users 
and try to tell whether they might do something 
hazardous. 
Conflicts. You are in conflict when you have to 
change speed and/or direction to avoid hitting 
someone. Conflicts occur at intersections where 
vehicles meet, at merges (such as turnpike on 
ramps) and where there are needed lane changes 
(such as the end of a lane, forcing a move to another 
lane of traffic). Other situations include slow moving 
or stalled traffic in a traffic lane, and accident 
scenes. Watch for other drivers who are in conflict 
because they are a hazard to you. When they react 
to this conflict, they may do something that will put 
them in conflict with you. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-20  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
2.8.4 – Always Have a Plan 
You should always be looking for hazards. Continue 
to learn to see hazards on the road. However, don't 
forget why you are looking for the hazards--they 
may turn into emergencies. You look for the hazards 
in order to have time to plan a way out of any 
emergency. When you see a hazard, think about the 
emergencies that could develop and figure out what 
you would do. Always be prepared to take action 
based on your plans. In this way, you will be a 
prepared, defensive driver who will improve your 
own safety as well as the safety of all road users. 
Subsections 2.7 and 2.8 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
How do you find out how many seconds of 
following distance space you have? 
If you are driving a 30-foot vehicle at 55 
mph, how many seconds of following 
distance should you allow? 
You should decrease your following 
distance if somebody is following you too 
closely. True or False? 
If you swing wide to the left before turning 
right, another driver may try to pass you on 
the right. True or False? 
What is a hazard? 
Why make emergency plans when you see 
a hazard? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.7 and 2.8 
2.9 – Distracted Driving 
A driver distraction is anything that takes your 
attention away from driving. Whenever you are 
driving a vehicle and your full attention is not on the 
driving task, you are putting yourself, your 
passengers, other vehicles, and pedestrians in 
danger. Distracted driving can cause collisions, 
resulting in injury, death or property damage.  
Activities inside of the vehicle that can distract your 
attention include:  talking to passengers; adjusting 
the radio, CD player or climate controls; eating, 
drinking or smoking; reading maps or other 
literature; picking up something that fell; talking on 
a cell phone or CB radio; reading or sending text 
messages; using any type of telematic or electronic  
devices (such as navigation systems, pagers, 
personal digital assistant, computers, etc.); 
daydreaming or being occupied with other mental 
distractions; and many others. 
Possible distractions that could occur outside a 
moving vehicle: outside traffic, vehicles or 
pedestrians; outside events such as police pulling 
someone over or a crash scene; sunlight/sunset; 
objects in roadway; road construction; reading 
billboards or other road advertisements; and many 
others. 
2.9.1 – The Distracted Driving Crash Problem 
The Large Truck Crash Causation Study (LTCCS) 
reported that 8 percent of large-truck crashes 
occurred when Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV) 
drivers were externally distracted and 2 percent of 
large truck crashes occurred when the driver was 
internally distracted. 
Approximately 5,500 people are killed each year on 
U.S. roadways and an estimated 448,000 are 
injured in motor vehicle crashes involving distracted 
driving (NHTSA Traffic Safety Facts: Distracted 
Driving). 
Research indicates that the burden of talking on a 
cell phone - even if it's hands-free - saps the brain 
of 39% of the energy it would ordinarily devote to 
safe driving.  Drivers who use a hand-held device 
are more likely to get into a crash serious enough to 
cause injury.  (NHTSA distracted driving website, 
www.distraction.gov). 
2.9.2 – Effects of Distracted Driving 
Effects of distracted driving include slowed 
perception, which may cause you to be delayed in 
perceiving or completely fail to perceive an 
important traffic event; delayed decision making and 
improper action, which can cause you to be delayed 
in taking the proper action or make incorrect inputs 
to the steering, accelerator or brakes. 
2.9.3 – Types of Distractions 
There are many causes of distraction, all with the 
potential to increase risk. 
Physical distraction – one that causes you to take 
your hands off the wheel or eyes off the road, such 
as reaching for an object. 
Mental distraction – activities that take your mind 
away from the road, such as engaging in 
conversation with a passenger or thinking about 
something that happened during the day. 
Both physical and mental distraction – even 
greater chance a crash could happen, such as 
talking on a cell phone; or sending or reading text 
messages. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-21  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
2.9.4 – Cell/Mobile Phones  
49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391 and 392 of the 
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations 
(FMCSRs) and the Hazardous Materials 
Regulations (HMR) restricts the use of hand-held 
mobile telephones by drivers of commercial motor 
vehicles (CMVs); and implements new driver 
disqualification sanctions for drivers of CMVs who 
fail to comply with this Federal restriction; or who 
have multiple convictions for violating a State or 
local law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic 
control that restricts the use of hand-held mobile 
telephones. Additionally, motor carriers are 
prohibited from requiring or allowing drivers of 
CMVs to use hand-held mobile telephones. 
The use of hand-held mobile telephones means, 
‘‘using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone 
to conduct a voice communication; “dialing a mobile 
telephone by pressing more than a single button”; 
or “moving from a seated driving position while 
restrained by a seat belt to reach for a mobile 
telephone”. If you choose to use a mobile phone 
while operating a CMV, you may only use a hands 
free mobile phone that is located close to you and 
that can be operated in compliance with the rule to 
conduct a voice communication. 
Your CDL will be disqualified after two or more 
convictions of any state law on hand-held mobile 
telephone use while operating a CMV. 
Disqualification is 60 days for the second offense 
within 3 years and 120 days for three or more 
offenses within 3 years. In addition, the first and 
each subsequent violation of such a prohibition are 
subject to civil penalties imposed on such drivers, in 
an amount up to $2,750. Motor carriers must not 
allow nor require drivers to use a hand-held mobile 
telephone while driving. Employers may also be 
subject to civil penalties in an amount up to $11,000. 
There is an emergency exception that allows you to 
use your hand-held mobile telephones if necessary 
to communicate with law enforcement officials or 
other emergency services.  
Research shows that the odds of being involved in 
a safety-critical event (e.g., crash, near-crash, 
unintentional lane deviation) is 6 times greater for 
CMV drivers who engage in dialing a mobile 
telephone while driving than for those who do not. 
Dialing drivers took their eyes off the forward 
roadway for an average of 3.8 seconds. At 55 mph 
(or 80.7 feet per second), this equates to a driver 
traveling 306 feet, the approximate length of a 
football field, without looking at the roadway. 
Your primary responsibility is to operate a motor 
vehicle safely. To do this, you must focus your full 
attention on the driving task.  
Note that hands-free devices are no less likely than 
hand-held cell phones to cause you to become 
distracted.  Attention is diverted from the driving task 
while using either device. 
2.9.5 –Texting 
49 CFR Part 383, 384, 390, 391, 392, the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR) 
prohibits texting by commercial motor vehicle 
(CMV) drivers while operating in interstate 
commerce;
 and implements new driver 
disqualification sanctions for drivers of CMVs who 
fail to comply with this Federal prohibition; or who 
have multiple convictions for violating a State or 
local law or ordinance on motor vehicle traffic 
control that prohibits texting while driving. 
Additionally, motor carriers are prohibited from 
requiring or allowing their drivers to engage in 
texting while driving.  
Texting means manually entering text into, or 
reading text from, an electronic device. This 
includes, but is not limited to, short message 
service, e-mailing, instant messaging, a command 
or request to access a World Wide Web page, or 
engaging in any other form of electronic text 
retrieval
 or
communication. 
 entry,
 for
 present 
or future 
Electronic device includes, but is not limited to, a 
cellular telephone; personal digital assistant; pager; 
computer; or any other device used to enter, write, 
send, receive, or read text. 
Your CDL will be disqualified after two or more 
convictions of any state law on texting while 
operating a CMV. Disqualification is 60 days for the 
second offense within 3 years and 120 days for 
three or more offenses within 3 years. In addition, 
the first and each subsequent violation of such a 
prohibition are subject to civil penalties imposed on 
such drivers, in an amount up to $2,750. No motor 
carrier shall allow or require its drivers to engage in 
texting while driving. There is an emergency 
exception that allows you text if necessary to 
communicate with law enforcement officials or other 
emergency services. 
Evidence suggests that text messaging is even 
riskier than talking on a cell phone because it 
requires you to look at a small screen and 
manipulate the keypad with one’s hands.  Texting is 
the most alarming distraction because it involves 
both
 physical 
simultaneously. 
and
 mental
 distraction 
Research shows that the odds of being involved in 
a safety-critical event (e.g., crash, near-crash, 
unintentional lane deviation) is 23.2 times greater 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-22  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
for CMV drivers who engage in texting while driving 
than for those who do not. Sending or receiving text 
takes your eyes from the road for an average of 4.6 
seconds.  At 55 mph, you would travel 371 feet, or 
the length of an entire football field – without looking 
at the roadway.  
2.9.6 – Don’t Drive Distracted 
Your goal should be to eliminate all in-vehicle 
distractions before driving begins. Accomplishing 
this goal can be done by: 
Assessing all potential in-vehicle distractions before 
driving 
Developing a preventative plan to reduce/eliminate 
possible distractions 
Expecting distractions to occur 
Discussing possible scenarios before getting behind 
the wheel 
Based on the assessment of potential distractions, 
you can formulate a preventative plan to 
reduce/eliminate possible distractions. 
If drivers react a half-second slower because of 
distractions, crashes double. Some tips to follow so 
you won’t become distracted: 
Turn off all communication devices.  
If you must use a mobile phone, make sure it is 
within close proximity, that it is operable while you 
are restrained, use an earpiece or the speaker 
phone function, use voice-activated dialing; or use 
the hands-free feature. Drivers are not in 
compliance if they unsafely reach for a mobile 
phone, even if they intend to use the hands-free 
function.  
Do not type or read a text message on a mobile 
device while driving. 
Familiarize yourself with your vehicle’s features and 
equipment, before you get behind the wheel.  
Adjust all vehicle controls and mirrors to your 
preferences prior to driving. 
Pre-program radio stations and pre-load your 
favorite CDs. 
Clear the vehicle of any unnecessary objects and 
secure cargo. 
Review maps, program the GPS and plan your route 
before you begin driving. 
Don’t attempt to read or write while you drive. 
Avoid smoking, eating and drinking while you drive. 
Leave early to allow yourself time to stop to eat. 
Don’t engage in complex or emotionally intense 
conversations with other occupants. 
Secure commitment from other occupants to 
behave responsibly and to support the driver in 
reducing distractions. 
2.9.7 – Watch Out for Other Distracted Drivers 
You need to be able to recognize other drivers who 
are engaged in any form of driving distraction. Not 
recognizing other distracted drivers can prevent you 
from perceiving or reacting correctly in time to 
prevent a crash. Watch for: 
Vehicles that may drift over the lane divider lines or 
within their own lane. 
Vehicles traveling at inconsistent speeds. 
Drivers who are preoccupied with maps, food, 
cigarettes, cell phones, or other objects. 
Drivers who appear to be involved in conversations 
with their passengers. 
Give a distracted driver plenty of room and maintain 
your safe following distance. 
Be very careful when passing a driver who seems 
to be distracted. The other driver may not be aware 
of your presence, and they may drift in front of you. 
2.10 – Aggressive Drivers/Road Rage 
2.10.1 – What Is It? 
Aggressive driving and road rage is not a new 
problem. However, in today’s world, where heavy 
and slow-moving traffic and tight schedules are the 
norm, more and more drivers are taking out their 
anger and frustration in their vehicles.  
Crowded roads leave little room for error, leading to 
suspicion and hostility among drivers and 
encouraging them to take personally the mistakes 
of other drivers. 
Aggressive driving is the act of operating a motor 
vehicle in a selfish, bold, or pushy manner, without 
regard for the rights or safety of others (i.e. changing 
lanes frequently and abruptly without notice)..  
Road rage is operating a motor vehicle with the 
intent of doing harm to others or physically 
assaulting a driver or their vehicle. 
2.10.2 – Don’t Be an Aggressive Driver 
How you feel before you even start your vehicle has 
a lot to do with how stress will affect you while 
driving.  
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-23  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Reduce your stress before and while you drive. 
Listen to “easy listening” music.  
Give the drive your full attention. Don’t allow 
yourself to become distracted by talking on your 
cell phone, eating, etc.  
Be realistic about your travel time. Expect delays 
because of traffic, construction, or bad weather 
and make allowances. 
If you’re going to be later than you expected – deal 
with it. Take a deep breath and accept the delay. 
Give other drivers the benefit of the doubt. Try to 
imagine why he or she is driving that way. 
Whatever their reason, it has nothing to do with 
you. 
Slow down and keep your following distance 
reasonable. 
Don’t drive slowly in the left lane of traffic. 
Avoid gestures. Keep your hands on the wheel. 
Avoid making any gestures that might anger 
another driver, even seemingly harmless 
expressions of irritation like shaking your head. 
Be a cautious and courteous driver. If another 
driver seems eager to get in front of you, say, “Be 
my guest.” This response will soon become a habit 
and you won’t be as offended by other drivers’ 
actions. 
2.10.3 – What You Should Do When Confronted 
by an Aggressive Driver 
First and foremost, make every attempt to get out 
of their way. 
Put your pride in the back seat. Do not challenge 
them by speeding up or attempting to hold-your
own in your travel lane. 
Avoid eye contact. 
Ignore gestures and refuse to react to them. 
Report aggressive drivers to the appropriate 
authorities by providing a vehicle description, 
license number, location and, if possible, direction 
of travel. 
If you have a cell phone, and can do it safely, call 
the police. 
If an aggressive driver is involved in a crash farther 
down the road, stop a safe distance from the crash 
scene, wait for the police to arrive, and report the 
driving behavior that you witnessed. 
Subsections 2.9 and 2.10 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What are some tips to follow so you won’t 
become a distracted driver? 
2. How do you use in-vehicle communications 
equipment cautiously? 
3. How do you recognize a distracted driver? 
4. What is the difference between aggressive 
driving and road rage? 
5. What should you do when confronted with an 
aggressive driver? 
6. What are some things you can do to reduce 
your stress before and while you drive? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.9 and 2.10. 
2.11 – Driving at Night 
2.11.1 – It's More Dangerous 
You are at greater risk when you drive at night. 
Drivers can't see hazards as quickly as in daylight, 
so they have less time to respond. Drivers caught 
by surprise are less able to avoid a crash. 
The problems of night driving involve the driver, the 
roadway, and the vehicle.  
2.11.2 – Driver Factors 
Vision. Good vision is critical for safe driving.  Your 
control of the brake, accelerator, and steering wheel 
is based on what you see.  If you cannot see clearly, 
you will have trouble identifying traffic and roadway 
conditions, spotting potential trouble or responding 
to problems in a timely manner. 
Because seeing well is so critical to safe driving, you 
should have your eyes checked regularly by an eye 
specialist.  You may never know you have poor 
vision unless your eyes are tested.  If you need to 
wear glasses or contact lenses for driving, 
remember to: 
Always wear them when driving, even if driving short 
distances.  If your driver license says corrective 
lenses are required, it is illegal to move a vehicle 
without using corrective lenses. 
Keep an extra set of corrective lenses in your 
vehicle.  If your normal corrective lenses are broken 
or lost, you can use the spare lenses to drive safely.   
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-24  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Avoid using dark or tinted corrective lenses at night, 
even if you think they help with glare.  Tinted lenses 
cut down the light that you need to see clearly under 
night driving conditions. 
Glare. Drivers can be blinded for a short time by 
bright light. . It can take several seconds to recover 
from glare. Even two seconds of glare blindness can 
be dangerous. A vehicle going 55 mph will travel 
more than half the distance of a football field during 
that time.  
Fatigue and Lack of Alertness. Fatigue is physical 
or mental tiredness that can be caused by physical 
or mental strain, repetitive tasks, illness or lack of 
sleep.  Just like alcohol and drugs, it impairs your 
vision and judgment.   
Fatigue causes errors related to speed and 
distance, increases your risk of being in a crash, 
causes you to not see and react to hazards as  
quickly; and affects your ability to make critical 
decisions.   When you are fatigued, you could fall 
asleep behind the wheel and crash, injuring or killing 
yourself or others. 
Fatigued or drowsy driving is one of the leading 
causes of traffic collisions.  NHTSA estimates that 
100,000 police-reported crashes a year are the 
result of drowsy driving.  According to the National 
Sleep Foundation’s Sleep in America poll, 60% of 
Americans have driven while feeling sleepy and 
more than one third (36 percent or 103 million 
people) admit to having actually fallen asleep at the 
wheel.  Drivers may experience short bursts of sleep 
lasting only a few seconds or fall asleep for longer 
periods of time.  Either way, the chance of a collision 
increases dramatically. 
At-Risk Groups 
The risk of having a crash due to drowsy driving is 
not uniformly distributed across the population. 
Crashes tend to occur at times when sleepiness is 
most pronounced, for example, during the night and 
in the mid-afternoon. Most people are less alert at 
night, especially after midnight. This is particularly 
true if you have been driving for a long time. Thus 
individuals who drive at night are much more likely 
to have fall-asleep crashes.  
Research has identified young males, shift workers, 
commercial drivers, especially long-haul drivers and 
people with untreated sleep disorders or with short
term or chronic sleep deprivation as being at 
increased risk for having a fall-asleep crash. At least 
15% of all heavy truck crashes involve fatigue. 
A congressionally mandated study of 80 long-haul 
truck drivers in the United States and Canada found 
that drivers averaged less than 5 hours of sleep per 
day. (Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
1996) It is no surprise then that the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) reported that 
drowsy driving was probably the cause of more than 
half of crashes leading to a truck driver’s death. 
(NTSB, 1990) For each truck driver fatality, another 
three to four people are killed. (NHTSA, 1994) 
Warning Signs of Fatigue 
According to the National Sleep Foundation’s Sleep 
in America poll, 60% of Americans have driven while 
feeling sleepy and 36% admit to actually having 
fallen asleep at the wheel in the past year. However, 
many people cannot tell if or when they are about to 
fall asleep. Here are some signs that should tell you 
to stop and rest: 
Difficulty focusing, frequent blinking or heavy 
eyelids 
Yawning repeatedly or rubbing eyes 
Day-dreaming; 
or 
wandering/disconnected 
thoughts 
Trouble remembering the last few miles driven; 
missing exits or traffic signs  
Trouble keeping head up 
Drifting from your lane, following too closely or 
hitting a shoulder rumble strip 
Feeling restless and irritable 
When you are tired trying to “push on” is far more 
dangerous than most drivers think. It is a major 
cause of fatal accidents. If you notice any signs of 
fatigue, stop driving and go to sleep for the night or 
take a 15 – 20 minute nap. 
Are You At Risk? 
Before you drive, consider whether you are: 
Sleep-deprived or fatigued (6 hours of sleep or less 
triples your risk) 
Suffering from sleep loss (insomnia), poor quality 
sleep, or a sleep debt 
Driving long distances without proper rest breaks 
Driving through the night, mid-afternoon or when 
you would normally be asleep. Many heavy motor 
vehicle accidents occur between midnight and 6 
a.m.  
Taking sedating medications (antidepressants, cold 
tablets, antihistamines) 
Working more than 60 hours a week (increases your 
risk by 40%) 
Working more than one job, and your main job 
involves shift work 
Driving alone or on a long, rural, dark or boring road 
Flying, changing time zone 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-25  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Preventing drowsiness before a trip: 
Get adequate sleep – adults need 8 to 9 hours to 
maintain alertness 
Prepare route carefully to identify total distance, 
stopping points and other logistic considerations 
Schedule trips for the hours you are normally 
awake, not the middle of the night 
Drive with a passenger 
Avoid medications that cause drowsiness 
Consult your physician if you suffer from daytime 
sleepiness, have difficulty sleeping at night or take 
frequent naps 
Incorporate exercise into your daily life to give you 
more energy. 
Maintaining alertness while driving: 
Protect yourself from glare and eyestrain with 
sunglasses 
Keep cool by opening the window or using the air 
conditioner 
Avoid heavy foods 
Be aware of down time during the day 
Have another person ride with you, and take turns 
driving 
Take periodic breaks – about every 100 miles or 2 
hours during long trips 
Stop driving and get some rest or take a nap 
Caffeine consumption can increase awareness for 
a few hours, but do not drink too much. It will 
eventually wear off. Do not rely on caffeine to 
prevent fatigue 
Avoid drugs. While they may keep you awake for a 
while, they won’t make you alert.  
If you are drowsy, the only safe cure is to get off the 
road and get some sleep. If you don't, you risk your 
life and the lives of others.   
2.11.3 – Roadway Factors 
Poor Lighting. In the daytime there is usually 
enough light to see well. This is not true at night. 
Some areas may have bright street lights, but many 
areas will have poor lighting. On most roads you will 
probably have to depend entirely on your 
headlights. 
Less light means you will not be able to see hazards 
as well as in daytime. Road users who do not have 
lights are hard to see. There are many accidents at 
night involving pedestrians, joggers, bicyclists, and 
animals. 
Even when there are lights, the road scene can be 
confusing. Traffic signals and hazards can be hard 
to see against a background of signs, shop 
windows, and other lights. 
Drive slower when lighting is poor or confusing.  
Drive slowly enough to be sure you can stop in the 
distance you can see ahead. 
Drunk Drivers. Drunk drivers and drivers under the 
influence of drugs are a hazard to themselves and 
to you. Be especially alert around the closing times 
for bars and taverns. Watch for drivers who have 
trouble staying in their lane or maintaining speed, 
who stop without reason, or show other signs of 
being under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
2.11.4 – Vehicle Factors 
Headlights. At night your headlights will usually be 
the main source of light for you to see by and for 
others to see you. You can't see nearly as much with 
your headlights as you see in the daytime. With low 
beams you can see ahead about 250 feet and with 
high beams about 350-500 feet. You must adjust 
your speed to keep your stopping distance within 
your sight distance. This means going slowly 
enough to be able to stop within the range of your 
headlights. Otherwise, by the time you see a 
hazard, you will not have time to stop. 
Night driving can be more dangerous if you have 
problems with your headlights. Dirty headlights may 
give only half the light they should. This cuts down 
your ability to see, and makes it harder for others to 
see you. Make sure your lights are clean and 
working. Headlights can be out of adjustment. If they 
don't point in the right direction, they won't give you 
a good view and they can blind other drivers. Have 
a qualified person make sure they are adjusted 
properly. 
Other Lights. In order for you to be seen easily, the 
following must be clean and working properly: 
Reflectors. 
Marker lights. 
Clearance lights. 
Taillights. 
Identification lights. 
Turn Signals and Brake Lights. At night your turn 
signals and brake lights are even more important for 
telling other drivers what you intend to do. Make 
sure you have clean, working turn signals and stop 
lights. 
Windshield and Mirrors. It is more important at 
night than in the daytime to have a clean windshield 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-26  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
and clean mirrors. Bright lights at night can cause 
dirt on your windshield or mirrors to create a glare 
of its own, blocking your view. Most people have 
experienced driving toward the sun just as it has 
risen or is about to set, and found that they can 
barely see through a windshield that seemed to look 
OK in the middle of the day. Clean your windshield 
on the inside and outside for safe driving at night. 
2.11.5 – Night Driving Procedures 
Vehicle Procedures. Make sure you are rested and 
alert. If you are drowsy, sleep before you drive! 
Even a nap can save your life or the lives of others. 
If you wear eyeglasses, make sure they are clean 
and unscratched. Don't wear sunglasses at night. 
Do a complete Vehicle inspection of your vehicle. 
Pay attention to checking all lights and reflectors, 
and cleaning those you can reach. 
Avoid Blinding Others. Glare from your headlights 
can cause problems for drivers coming toward you. 
They can also bother drivers going in the same 
direction you are, when your lights shine in their 
rearview mirrors. Dim your lights before they cause 
glare for other drivers. Dim your lights within 500 
feet of an oncoming vehicle and when following 
another vehicle within 500 feet. 
Avoid Glare from Oncoming Vehicles. Do not 
look directly at lights of oncoming vehicles. Look 
slightly to the right at a right lane or edge marking, 
if available. If other drivers don't put their low beams 
on, don't try to "get back at them" by putting your 
own high beams on. This increases glare for 
oncoming drivers and increases the chance of a 
crash. 
Use High Beams When You Can. Some drivers 
make the mistake of always using low beams. This 
seriously cuts down on their ability to see ahead. 
Use high beams when it is safe and legal to do so. 
Use them when you are not within 500 feet of an 
approaching vehicle. Also, don't let the inside of 
your cab get too bright. This makes it harder to see 
outside. Keep the interior light off, and adjust your 
instrument lights as low as you can to still be able to 
read the gauges. 
If You Get Sleepy, Stop at the Nearest Safe 
Place. People often don't realize how close they are 
to falling asleep even when their eyelids are falling 
shut. If you can safely do so, look at yourself in a 
mirror. If you look sleepy, or you just feel sleepy, 
stop driving! You are in a very dangerous condition. 
The only safe cure is to sleep. 
2.12 – Driving in Fog 
Fog can occur at any time. Fog on highways can be 
extremely dangerous. Fog is often unexpected, and 
visibility can deteriorate rapidly. You should watch 
for foggy conditions and be ready to reduce your 
speed. Do not assume that the fog will thin out after 
you enter it. 
The best advice for driving in fog is don’t. It is 
preferable that you pull off the road into a rest area 
or truck stop until visibility is better. If you must drive, 
be sure to consider the following: 
Obey all fog-related warning signs. 
Slow down before you enter fog.  
Use low-beam headlights and fog lights for best 
visibility even in daytime, and be alert for other 
drivers who may have forgotten to turn on their 
lights.  
Turn on your 4-way flashers. This will give vehicles 
approaching you from behind a quicker opportunity 
to notice your vehicle. 
Watch for vehicles on the side of the roadway. 
Seeing taillights or headlights in front of you may 
not be a true indication of where the road is ahead 
of you. The vehicle may not be on the road at all. 
Use roadside highway reflectors as guides to 
determine how the road may curve ahead of you. 
Listen for traffic you cannot see. 
Avoid passing other vehicles. 
Don’t stop along the side of the road, unless 
absolutely necessary.  
2.13 – Driving in Winter 
2.13.1 – Vehicle Checks 
Make sure your vehicle is ready before driving in 
winter weather. You should make a regular Vehicle 
inspection, paying extra attention to the following 
items. 
Coolant Level and Antifreeze Amount. Make sure 
the cooling system is full and there is enough 
antifreeze in the system to protect against freezing. 
This can be checked with a special coolant tester. 
Defrosting and Heating Equipment. Make sure 
the defrosters work. They are needed for safe 
driving. Make sure the heater is working, and that 
you know how to operate it. If you use other heaters 
and expect to need them (e.g., mirror heaters, 
battery box heaters, fuel tank heaters), check their 
operation. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-27  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Wipers and Washers. Make sure the windshield 
wiper blades are in good condition. Make sure the 
wiper blades press against the window hard enough 
to wipe the windshield clean, otherwise they may 
not sweep off snow properly. Make sure the 
windshield washer works and there is washing fluid 
in the washer reservoir. 
Use windshield washer antifreeze to prevent 
freezing of the washer liquid. If you can't see well 
enough while driving (for example, if your wipers 
fail), stop safely and fix the problem. 
Tires. Make sure you have enough tread on your 
tires. The drive tires must provide traction to push 
the rig over wet pavement and through snow. The 
steering tires must have traction to steer the vehicle. 
Enough tread is especially important in winter 
conditions. You must have at least 4/32 inch tread 
depth in every major groove on front tires and at 
least 2/32 inch on other tires. More would be better. 
Use a gauge to determine if you have enough tread 
for safe driving. 
Tire Chains. You may find yourself in conditions 
where you can't drive without chains, even to get to 
a place of safety. Carry the right number of chains 
and extra cross-links. Make sure they will fit your 
drive tires. Check the chains for broken hooks, worn 
or broken cross-links, and bent or broken side 
chains. Learn how to put the chains on before you 
need to do it in snow and ice. 
Lights and Reflectors. Make sure the lights and 
reflectors are clean. Lights and reflectors are 
especially important during bad weather. Check 
from time to time during bad weather to make sure 
they are clean and working properly. 
Windows and Mirrors. Remove any ice, snow, 
etc., from the windshield, windows, and mirrors 
before starting. Use a windshield scraper, snow 
brush, and windshield defroster as necessary. 
Hand Holds, Steps, and Deck Plates. Remove all 
ice and snow from hand holds, steps, and deck 
plates. This will reduce the danger of slipping. 
Radiator Shutters and Winterfront. Remove ice 
from the radiator shutters. Make sure the winterfront 
is not closed too tightly. If the shutters freeze shut 
or the winterfront is closed too much, the engine 
may overheat and stop.  
Exhaust System. Exhaust system leaks are 
especially dangerous when cab ventilation may be 
poor (windows rolled up, etc.). Loose connections 
could permit poisonous carbon monoxide to leak 
into your vehicle. Carbon monoxide gas will cause 
you to be sleepy. In large enough amounts it can kill 
you. Check the exhaust system for loose parts and 
for sounds and signs of leaks. 
2.13.2 – Driving 
Slippery Surfaces. Drive slowly and smoothly on 
slippery roads. If it is very slippery, you shouldn't 
drive at all. Stop at the first safe place. 
Start Gently and Slowly. When first starting, get 
the feel of the road. Don't hurry. 
Check for Ice. Check for ice on the road, especially 
bridges and overpasses. A lack of spray from other 
vehicles indicates ice has formed on the road. Also, 
check your mirrors and wiper blades for ice. If they 
have ice, the road most likely will be icy as well. 
Adjust Turning and Braking to Conditions. Make 
turns as gently as possible. Don't brake any harder 
than necessary, and don't use the engine brake or 
speed retarder. (They can cause the driving wheels 
to skid on slippery surfaces.) 
Adjust Speed to Conditions. Don't pass slower 
vehicles unless necessary. Go slowly and watch far 
enough ahead to keep a steady speed. Avoid 
having to slow down and speed up. Take curves at 
slower speeds and don't brake while in curves. Be 
aware that as the temperature rises to the point 
where ice begins to melt, the road becomes even 
more slippery. Slow down more. 
Adjust Space to Conditions. Don't drive alongside 
other vehicles. Keep a longer following distance. 
When you see a traffic jam ahead, slow down or 
stop to wait for it to clear. Try hard to anticipate 
stops early and slow down gradually. Watch for 
snowplows, as well as salt and sand trucks, and 
give them plenty of room. 
Wet Brakes. When driving in heavy rain or deep 
standing water, your brakes will get wet. Water in 
the brakes can cause the brakes to be weak, to 
apply unevenly, or to grab. This can cause lack of 
braking power, wheel lockups, pulling to one side or 
the other, and jackknife if you pull a trailer. 
Avoid driving through deep puddles or flowing water 
if possible. If not, you should: 
Slow down and place transmission in a low gear. 
Gently put on the brakes. This presses linings 
against brake drums or discs and keeps mud, silt, 
sand, and water from getting in. 
Increase engine rpm and cross the water while 
keeping light pressure on the brakes. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-28  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
When out of the water, maintain light pressure on 
the brakes for a short distance to heat them up and 
dry them out. 
Make a test stop when safe to do so. Check 
behind to make sure no one is following, then 
apply the brakes to be sure they work well. If not, 
dry them out further as described above. 
(CAUTION: Do not apply too much brake pressure 
and accelerator at the same time, or you can 
overheat brake drums and linings. 
2.14 – Driving in Very Hot Weather 
2.14.1 – Vehicle Checks 
Do a normal Vehicle inspection, but pay special 
attention to the following items. 
Tires. Check the tire mounting and air pressure. 
Inspect the tires every two hours or every 100 miles 
when driving in very hot weather. Air pressure 
increases with temperature. Do not let air out or the 
pressure will be too low when the tires cool off. If a 
tire is too hot to touch, remain stopped until the tire 
cools off. Otherwise the tire may blow out or catch 
fire. 
Engine Oil. The engine oil helps keep the engine 
cool, as well as lubricating it. Make sure there is 
enough engine oil. If you have an oil temperature 
gauge, make sure the temperature is within the 
proper range while you are driving. 
Engine Coolant. Before starting out, make sure the 
engine cooling system has enough water and 
antifreeze according to the engine manufacturer's 
directions. (Antifreeze helps the engine under hot 
conditions as well as cold conditions.) When driving, 
check the water temperature or coolant temperature 
gauge from time to time. Make sure that it remains 
in the normal range. If the gauge goes above the 
highest safe temperature, there may be something 
wrong that could lead to engine failure and possibly 
fire. Stop driving as soon as safely possible and try 
to find out what is wrong. 
Some vehicles have sight glasses, see-through 
coolant overflow containers, or coolant recovery 
containers. These permit you to check the coolant 
level while the engine is hot. If the container is not 
part of the pressurized system, the cap can be 
safely removed and coolant added even when the 
engine is at operating temperature. 
Never remove the radiator cap or any part of the 
pressurized system until the system has cooled. 
Steam and boiling water can spray under pressure 
and cause severe burns. If you can touch the 
radiator cap with your bare hand, it is probably cool 
enough to open. 
If coolant has to be added to a system without a 
recovery tank or overflow tank, follow these steps: 
Shut engine off. 
Wait until engine has cooled. 
Protect hands (use gloves or a thick cloth). 
Turn radiator cap slowly to the first stop, which 
releases the pressure seal. 
Step back while pressure is released from cooling 
system. 
When all pressure has been released, press down 
on the cap and turn it further to remove it. 
Visually check level of coolant and add more 
coolant if necessary. 
Replace cap and turn all the way to the closed 
position. 
Engine Belts. Learn how to check v-belt tightness 
on your vehicle by pressing on the belts. Loose belts 
will not turn the water pump and/or fan properly. 
This will result in overheating. Also, check belts for 
cracking or other signs of wear. 
Hoses. Make sure coolant hoses are in good 
condition. A broken hose while driving can lead to 
engine failure and even fire. 
2.14.2 – Driving 
Watch for Bleeding Tar. Tar in the road pavement 
frequently rises to the surface in very hot weather. 
Spots where tar "bleeds" to the surface are very 
slippery. 
Go Slowly Enough to Prevent Overheating. High 
speeds create more heat for tires and the engine. In 
desert conditions the heat may build up to the point 
where it is dangerous. The heat will increase 
chances of tire failure or even fire, and engine 
failure. 
Subsections 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, and 2.14 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
You should use low beams whenever you can. 
True or False? 
What should you do before you drive if you are 
drowsy? 
What effects can wet brakes cause? How can 
you avoid these problems? 
You should let air out of hot tires so the 
pressure goes back to normal. True or False? 
You can safely remove the radiator cap as long 
as the engine isn't overheated. True or False? 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-29  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer all of them, re-read subsections 2.11, 2.12, 
2.13, and 2.14. 
2.15 – Railroad-highway Crossings 
Railroad-highway grade crossings are a special 
kind of intersection where the roadway crosses train 
tracks. These crossings are always dangerous. 
Every such crossing must be approached with the 
expectation that a train is coming.  It is extremely 
difficult to judge the distance of the train from the 
crossing as well as the speed of an approaching 
train. 
2.15.1 – Types of Crossings 
Passive Crossings. This type of crossing does not 
have any type of traffic control device. The decision 
to stop or proceed rests entirely in your hands. 
Passive crossings require you to recognize the 
crossing, search for any train using the tracks and 
decide if there is sufficient clear space to cross 
safely. 
Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a 
traffic control device installed at the crossing to 
regulate traffic at the crossing. These active devices 
include flashing red lights, with or without bells and 
flashing red lights with bells and gates. 
2.15.2 – Warning Signs and Devices 
Advance Warning Signs. The round, black-on
yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public 
railroad-highway crossing. The advance warning 
sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the 
train, and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a train 
is coming. All passenger and hazmat carrying 
vehicles are required to stop.  See Figure 2.15. 
Figure 2.15 
Pavement Markings. Pavement markings mean 
the same as the advance warning sign. They consist 
of an “X” with the letters “”RR” and a no-passing 
marking on two-lane roads. See Figure 2.16. 
Figure 2.16 
There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane 
roads. There may be a white stop line painted on 
the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front of 
the school bus must remain behind this line while 
stopped at the crossing. 
Cross-buck Signs. This sign marks the grade 
crossing. It requires you to yield the right-of-way to 
the train. If there is no white stop line painted on the 
pavement, vehicles that are required to stop must 
stop no closer than 15 feet or more than 50 feet from 
the nearest rail of the nearest track.  When the road 
crosses over more than one track, a sign below the 
cross-buck indicates the number of tracks. See 
Figure 2.17. 
Figure2.17 
Flashing Red Light Signals. At many highway-rail 
grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing 
red lights and bells. When the lights begin to flash, 
stop! A train is approaching. You are required to 
yield the right-of-way to the train. If there is more 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-30  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
than one track, make sure all tracks are clear before 
crossing. See Figure 2.18. 
Gates. Many railroad-highway crossings have 
gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when 
the lights begin to flash and before the gate lowers 
across the road lane. Remain stopped until the 
gates go up and the lights have stopped flashing. 
Proceed when it is safe. See Figure 2.18. 
Figure 2.18 
2.15.3 – Driving Procedures 
Never Race a Train to a Crossing. Never attempt 
to race a train to a crossing. It is extremely difficult 
to judge the speed of an approaching train. 
Reduce Speed. Speed must be reduced in 
accordance with your ability to see approaching 
trains in any direction, and speed must be held to a 
point which will permit you to stop short of the tracks 
in case a stop is necessary. 
Don't Expect to Hear a Train. Trains may not or 
are prohibited from sounding horns when 
approaching some crossings.  Public crossings 
where trains do not sound horns should be identified 
by signs.  Noise inside your vehicle may, also 
prevent you from hearing the train horn until the train 
is dangerously close to the crossing. 
Don't Rely on Signals. You should not rely solely 
upon the presence of warning signals, gates, or 
flagmen to warn of the approach of trains. Be 
especially alert at crossings that do not have gates 
or flashing red light signals.  
Double Tracks Require a Double Check. 
Remember that a train on one track may hide a train 
on the other track. Look both ways before crossing. 
After one train has cleared a crossing, be sure no 
other trains are near before starting across the 
tracks. 
Yard Areas and Grade Crossings in Cities and 
Towns. Yard areas and grade crossings in cities 
and towns are just as dangerous as rural grade 
crossings. Approach them with as much caution. 
2.15.4 – Stopping Safely at Railroad- highway 
Crossings 
A full stop is required at grade crossings whenever: 
The nature of the cargo makes a stop mandatory 
under state or federal regulations. 
Such a stop is otherwise required by law. 
When stopping be sure to: 
Check for traffic behind you while stopping 
gradually. Use a pullout lane, if available. 
Turn on your four-way emergency flashers. 
2.15.5 – Crossing the Tracks 
Railroad crossings with steep approaches can 
cause your unit to hang up on the tracks. 
Never permit traffic conditions to trap you in a 
position where you have to stop on the tracks. Be 
sure you can get all the way across the tracks before 
you start across. It takes a typical tractor-trailer unit 
at least 14 seconds to clear a single track and more 
than 15 seconds to clear a double track. 
Do not shift gears while crossing railroad tracks. 
2.15.6 – Special Situations 
Be Aware! These trailers can get stuck on raised 
crossings: 
Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van, 
possum-belly livestock trailer). 
Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its 
landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-axle 
tractor. 
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get out 
of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check 
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for 
emergency notification information. Call 911 or 
other emergency number. Give the location of the 
crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially 
the DOT number, if posted. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-31  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
2.16 – Mountain Driving 
In mountain driving, gravity plays a major role. On 
any upgrade, gravity slows you down. The steeper 
the grade, the longer the grade, and/or the heavier 
the load--the more you will have to use lower gears 
to climb hills or mountains. In coming down long, 
steep downgrades, gravity causes the speed of your 
vehicle to increase. You must select an appropriate 
safe speed, then use a low gear, and proper braking 
techniques. You should plan ahead and obtain 
information about any long, steep grades along your 
planned route of travel. If possible, talk to other 
drivers who are familiar with the grades to find out 
what speeds are safe. 
You must go slowly enough so your brakes can hold 
you back without getting too hot. If the brakes 
become too hot, they may start to "fade." This 
means you have to apply them harder and harder to 
get the same stopping power. If you continue to use 
the brakes hard, they can keep fading until you 
cannot slow down or stop at all. 
2.16.1 – Select a "Safe" Speed 
Your most important consideration is to select a 
speed that is not too fast for the: 
Total weight of the vehicle and cargo. 
Length of the grade. 
Steepness of the grade. 
Road conditions. 
Weather. 
If a speed limit is posted, or there is a sign indicating 
"Maximum Safe Speed," never exceed the speed 
shown. Also, look for and heed warning signs 
indicating the length and steepness of the grade. 
You must use the braking effect of the engine as the 
principal way of controlling your speed. The braking 
effect of the engine is greatest when it is near the 
governed rpms and the transmission is in the lower 
gears. Save your brakes so you will be able to slow 
or stop as required by road and traffic conditions. 
2.16.2 – Select the Right Gear before Starting 
Down the Grade 
Shift the transmission to a low gear before starting 
down the grade. Do not try to downshift after your 
speed has already built up. You will not be able to 
shift into a lower gear. You may not even be able to 
get back into any gear and all engine braking effect 
will be lost. Forcing an automatic transmission into 
a lower gear at high speed could damage the 
transmission and also lead to loss of all engine 
braking effect. 
With older trucks, a rule for choosing gears is to use 
the same gear going down a hill that you would need 
to climb the hill. However, new trucks have low 
friction parts and streamlined shapes for fuel 
economy. They may also have more powerful 
engines. This means they can go up hills in higher 
gears and have less friction and air drag to hold 
them back going down hills. For that reason, drivers 
of modern trucks may have to use lower gears going 
down a hill than would be required to go up the hill. 
You should know what is right for your vehicle. 
2.16.3 – Brake Fading or Failure 
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub 
against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle. 
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to 
take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail 
from excessive heat caused by using them too 
much and not relying on the engine braking effect. 
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To safely 
control a vehicle, every brake must do its share of 
the work. Brakes out of adjustment will stop doing 
their share before those that are in adjustment. The 
other brakes can then overheat and fade, and there 
will not be enough braking available to control the 
vehicle. Brakes can get out of adjustment quickly, 
especially when they are used a lot; also, brake 
linings wear faster when they are hot. Therefore, 
brake adjustment must be checked frequently. 
2.16.4 – Proper Braking Technique 
Remember. The use of brakes on a long and/or 
steep downgrade is only a supplement to the 
braking effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in 
the proper low gear, the following are the proper 
braking techniques: 
Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite 
slowdown. 
When your speed has been reduced to 
approximately five mph below your "safe" speed, 
release the brakes. (This brake application should 
last for about three seconds.) 
When your speed has increased to your "safe" 
speed, repeat steps 1 and 2. 
For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you 
would not apply the brakes until your speed reaches 
40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard enough to 
gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph and then 
release the brakes. Repeat this as often as 
necessary until you have reached the end of the 
downgrade. 
Escape ramps have been built on many steep 
mountain downgrades. Escape ramps are made to 
stop runaway vehicles safely without injuring drivers 
and passengers. Escape ramps use a long bed of 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-32  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
loose, soft material to slow a runaway vehicle, 
sometimes in combination with an upgrade.  
Know escape ramp locations on your route. Signs 
show drivers where ramp are located. Escape 
ramps save lives, equipment and cargo. 
Subsections 2.15 and 2.16 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What factors determine your selection of a 
"safe" speed when going down a long, steep 
downgrade? 
2. Why should you be in the proper gear before 
starting down a hill? 
3. Describe the proper braking technique when 
going down a long, steep downgrade. 
4. What type of vehicles can get stuck on a 
railroad-highway crossing? 
5. How long does it take for a typical tractor-trailer 
unit to clear a double track? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.15 and 2.16. 
2.17 – Driving Emergencies 
Traffic emergencies occur when two vehicles are 
about to collide. Vehicle emergencies occur when 
tires, brakes, or other critical parts fail. Following the 
safety practices in this manual can help prevent 
emergencies. But if an emergency does happen, 
your chances of avoiding a crash depend upon how 
well you take action. Actions you can take are 
discussed below. 
2.17.1 – Steering to Avoid a Crash 
Stopping is not always the safest thing to do in an 
emergency. When you don't have enough room to 
stop, you may have to steer away from what's 
ahead. Remember, you can almost always turn to 
miss an obstacle more quickly than you can stop. 
(However, top-heavy vehicles and tractors with 
multiple trailers may flip over.) 
Keep Both Hands on the Steering Wheel. In order 
to turn quickly, you must have a firm grip on the 
steering wheel with both hands. The best way to 
have both hands on the wheel, if there is an 
emergency, is to keep them there all the time. 
How to Turn Quickly and Safely. A quick turn can 
be made safely, if it's done the right way. Here are 
some points that safe drivers use: 
Do not apply the brake while you are turning. It's 
very easy to lock your wheels while turning. If that 
happens, you may skid out of control. 
Do not turn any more than needed to clear 
whatever is in your way. The more sharply you 
turn, the greater the chances of a skid or rollover. 
Be prepared to "counter-steer," that is, to turn the 
wheel back in the other direction, once you've 
passed whatever was in your path. Unless you are 
prepared to counter-steer, you won't be able to do 
it quickly enough. You should think of emergency 
steering and counter-steering as two parts of one 
driving action. 
Where to Steer. If an oncoming driver has drifted 
into your lane, a move to your right is best. If that 
driver realizes what has happened, the natural 
response will be to return to his or her own lane. 
If something is blocking your path, the best direction 
to steer will depend on the situation. 
If you have been using your mirrors, you'll know 
which lane is empty and can be safely used. 
If the shoulder is clear, going right may be best. No 
one is likely to be driving on the shoulder but 
someone may be passing you on the left. You will 
know if you have been using your mirrors. 
If you are blocked on both sides, a move to the 
right may be best. At least you won't force anyone 
into an opposing traffic lane and a possible head
on collision. 
Leaving the Road. In some emergencies, you may 
have to drive off the road. It may be less risky than 
facing a collision with another vehicle. 
Most shoulders are strong enough to support the 
weight of a large vehicle and, therefore, offer an 
available escape route. Here are some guidelines, 
if you do leave the road. 
Avoid Braking. If possible, avoid using the brakes 
until your speed has dropped to about 20 mph. Then 
brake very gently to avoid skidding on a loose 
surface. 
Keep One Set of Wheels on the Pavement, if 
Possible. This helps to maintain control. 
Stay on the Shoulder. If the shoulder is clear, stay 
on it until your vehicle has come to a stop. Signal 
and check your mirrors before pulling back onto the 
road. 
Returning to the Road. If you are forced to return 
to the road before you can stop, use the following 
procedure: 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-33  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Hold the wheel tightly and turn sharply enough to 
get right back on the road safely. Don't try to edge 
gradually back on the road. If you do, your tires 
might grab unexpectedly and you could lose 
control. 
When both front tires are on the paved surface, 
counter-steer immediately. The two turns should 
be made as a single "steer-counter-steer" move. 
2.17.2 – How to Stop Quickly and Safely 
If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your 
natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a good 
response if there's enough distance to stop, and you 
use the brakes correctly. 
You should brake in a way that will keep your 
vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it 
becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled 
braking" method or the "stab braking" method. 
Controlled Braking. With this method, you apply 
the brakes as hard as you can without locking the 
wheels. Keep steering wheel movements very small 
while doing this. If you need to make a larger 
steering adjustment or if the wheels lock, release 
the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you 
can. 
Stab Braking.  With this method, you apply your 
brakes all the way and release brakes when wheels 
lock up.  As soon as the wheels start rolling, apply 
the brakes fully again. (It can take up to one second 
for the wheels to start rolling after you release the 
brakes. If you re-apply the brakes before the wheels 
start rolling, the vehicle won't straighten out.) 
Don't Jam on the Brakes. Emergency braking 
does not mean pushing down on the brake pedal as 
hard as you can. That will only keep the wheels 
locked up and cause a skid. If the wheels are 
skidding, you cannot control the vehicle. 
2.17.3 – Brake Failure 
Brakes kept in good condition rarely fail. Most 
hydraulic brake failures occur for one of two 
reasons: (Air brakes are discussed in Section 5.) 
Loss of hydraulic pressure. 
Brake fade on long hills. 
Loss of Hydraulic Pressure. When the system 
won't build up pressure, the brake pedal will feel 
spongy or go to the floor. Here are some things you 
can do. 
Downshift. Putting the vehicle into a lower gear will 
help to slow the vehicle. 
Pump the Brakes. Sometimes pumping the brake 
pedal will generate enough hydraulic pressure to 
stop the vehicle. 
Use the Parking Brake. The parking or emergency 
brake is separate from the hydraulic brake system. 
Therefore, it can be used to slow the vehicle. 
However, be sure to press the release button or pull 
the release lever at the same time you use the 
emergency brake so you can adjust the brake 
pressure and keep the wheels from locking up. 
Find an Escape Route. While slowing the vehicle, 
look for an escape route--an open field, side-street, 
or escape ramp. Turning uphill is a good way to slow 
and stop the vehicle. Make sure the vehicle does 
not start rolling backward after you stop. Put it in low 
gear, apply the parking brake, and, if necessary, roll 
back into some obstacle that will stop the vehicle. 
Brake Failure on Downgrades. Going slow 
enough and braking properly will almost always 
prevent brake failure on long downgrades. Once the 
brakes have failed, however, you are going to have 
to look outside your vehicle for something to stop it. 
Your best hope is an escape ramp. If there is one, 
there'll be signs telling you about it. Use it. Ramps 
are usually located a few miles from the top of the 
downgrade. Every year, hundreds of drivers avoid 
injury to themselves or damage to their vehicles by 
using escape ramps. Some escape ramps use soft 
gravel that resists the motion of the vehicle and 
brings it to a stop. Others turn uphill, using the hill to 
stop the vehicle and soft gravel to hold it in place. 
Any driver who loses brakes going downhill should 
use an escape ramp if it's available. If you don't use 
it, your chances of having a serious crash may be 
much greater. 
If no escape ramp is available, take the least 
hazardous escape route you can--such as an open 
field or a side road that flattens out or turns uphill. 
Make the move as soon as you know your brakes 
don't work. The longer you wait, the faster the 
vehicle will go, and the harder it will be to stop. 
2.17.4 – Tire Failure 
Recognize Tire Failure. Quickly knowing you have 
a tire failure will let you have more time to react. 
Having just a few extra seconds to remember what 
it is you're supposed to do can help you. The major 
signs of tire failure are: 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-34  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Sound. The loud "bang" of a blowout is an easily 
recognized sign. Because it can take a few seconds 
for your vehicle to react, you might think it was some 
other vehicle. But any time you hear a tire blow, 
you'd be safest to assume it is yours. 
Vibration. If the vehicle thumps or vibrates heavily, 
it may be a sign that one of the tires has gone flat. 
With a rear tire, that may be the only sign you get. 
Feel. If the steering feels "heavy," it is probably a 
sign that one of the front tires has failed. 
Sometimes, failure of a rear tire will cause the 
vehicle to slide back and forth or "fishtail." 
However, dual rear tires usually prevent this. 
Respond to Tire Failure. When a tire fails, your 
vehicle is in danger. You must immediately: 
Hold the Steering Wheel Firmly. If a front tire 
fails, it can twist the steering wheel out of your 
hand. The only way to prevent this is to keep a firm 
grip on the steering wheel with both hands at all 
times. 
Stay off the Brake. It's natural to want to brake in 
an emergency. However, braking when a tire has 
failed could cause loss of control. Unless you're 
about to run into something, stay off the brake until 
the vehicle has slowed down. Then brake very 
gently, pull off the road, and stop. 
Check the Tires. After you've come to a stop, get 
out and check all the tires. Do this even if the 
vehicle seems to be handling all right. If one of 
your dual tires goes, the only way you may know it 
is by getting out and looking at it. 
2.18 – Antilock Braking Systems (ABS) 
ABS is a computerized system that keeps your 
wheels from locking up during hard brake 
applications. 
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does 
not decrease or increase your normal braking 
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are 
about to lock up. 
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping 
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under 
control during hard braking. 
2.18.1 – How Antilock Braking Systems Work 
Sensors detect potential wheel lock up. An 
electronic control unit (ECU) will then decrease 
brake pressure to avoid wheel lockup. 
Brake pressure is adjusted to provide the maximum 
braking without danger of lockup. 
ABS works far faster than the driver can respond to 
potential wheel lockup. At all other times the brake 
system will operate normally. 
2.18.2 – Vehicles Required to Have Antilock 
Braking Systems 
The Department of Transportation requires that 
ABS be on: 
Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after 
March 1, 1997. 
Other air brake vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers, 
and converter dollies) built on or after March 1, 
1998. 
Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more built on 
or after March 1, 1999. 
Many commercial vehicles built before these dates 
have been voluntarily equipped with ABS. 
2.18.3 – How to Know If Your Vehicle Is 
Equipped with ABS 
Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS 
malfunction lamps on the instrument panel. 
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on 
the left side, either on the front or rear corner.  
Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, are 
required to have a lamp on the left side. 
As a system check on newer vehicles, the 
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb 
check, and then goes out quickly. On older systems, 
the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five 
mph. 
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on 
once you are under way, you may have lost ABS 
control. 
In the case of towed units manufactured before it 
was required by the Department of Transportation, 
it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with 
ABS. Look under the vehicle for the ECU and wheel 
speed sensor wires coming from the back of the 
brakes.  
2.18.4 – How ABS Helps You 
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a 
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. 
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose 
steering control. When your other wheels lock up, 
you may skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-35  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain 
control. You may or may not be able to stop faster 
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around an 
obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused by 
over braking. 
2.18.5 – ABS on the Tractor Only or Only on the 
Trailer 
Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or 
even on only one axle, still gives you more control 
over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally. 
When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able 
to maintain steering control, and there is less 
chance of jackknifing. But keep your eye on the 
trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do 
so) if it begins to swing out. 
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less 
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or 
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you 
can safely do so) until you regain control. 
2.18.6 – Braking with ABS 
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should 
brake as you always have. In other words: 
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely 
and stay in control. 
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you 
have ABS on the bus, tractor, the trailer, or both. 
As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer 
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to 
stay in control. 
There is only one exception to this procedure. If you 
drive a straight truck or combination with working 
ABS on all axles, in an emergency stop, you can 
fully apply the brakes. 
2.18.7 – Braking If ABS Is Not Working 
Without ABS you still have normal brake functions. 
Drive and brake as you always have. 
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to 
tell you if something isn’t working.  
As a system check on newer vehicles, the 
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb 
check and then goes out quickly. On older systems, 
the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five 
mph. 
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on 
once you are under way, you may have lost ABS 
control on one or more wheels. 
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have 
regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the system 
serviced soon. 
2.18.8 – Safety Reminders 
ABS won’t allow you to drive faster, follow more 
closely, or drive less carefully. 
ABS won’t prevent power or turning skids–ABS 
should prevent brake-induced skids or jackknifes, 
but not those caused by spinning the drive wheels 
or going too fast in a turn. 
ABS won’t necessarily shorten stopping 
distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control, 
but not always shorten stopping distance. 
ABS won’t increase or decrease ultimate 
stopping power–ABS is an “add-on” to your 
normal brakes, not a replacement for them. 
ABS won’t change the way you normally brake. 
Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will 
stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into 
play when a wheel would normally have locked up 
because of over braking. 
ABS won’t compensate for bad brakes or poor 
brake maintenance. 
Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still 
a safe driver. 
Remember: Drive so you never need to use your 
ABS. 
Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to 
prevent a serious crash. 
2.19 – Skid Control and Recovery 
A skid happens whenever the tires lose their grip on 
the road. This is caused in one of four ways: 
Over-braking. Braking too hard and locking up the 
wheels. Skids also can occur when using the speed 
retarder when the road is slippery. 
Over-steering. Turning the wheels more sharply 
than the vehicle can turn. 
Over-acceleration. Supplying too much power to 
the drive wheels, causing them to spin. 
Driving Too Fast. Most serious skids result from 
driving too fast for road conditions. Drivers who 
adjust their driving to conditions don't over
accelerate and don't have to over-brake or over
steer from too much speed. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-36  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
2.19.1 – Drive-wheel Skids 
By far the most common skid is one in which the 
rear wheels lose traction through excessive braking 
or acceleration. Skids caused by acceleration 
usually happen on ice or snow. Taking your foot off 
the accelerator can easily stop them. (If it is very 
slippery, push the clutch in. Otherwise, the engine 
can keep the wheels from rolling freely and 
regaining traction.)  
Rear wheel braking skids occur when the rear drive 
wheels lock. Because locked wheels have less 
traction than rolling wheels, the rear wheels usually 
slide sideways in an attempt to "catch up" with the 
front wheels. In a bus or straight truck, the vehicle 
will slide sideways in a "spin out." With vehicles 
towing trailers, a drive-wheel skid can let the trailer 
push the towing vehicle sideways, causing a 
sudden jackknife. See Figure 2.19. 
2.19.2 – Correcting a Drive-wheel Braking Skid 
Do the following to correct a drive-wheel braking 
skid. 
Stop Braking. This will let the rear wheels roll 
again, and keep the rear wheels from sliding.  
Counter-steer. As a vehicle turns back on course, 
it has a tendency to keep on turning. Unless you turn 
the steering wheel quickly the other way, you may 
find yourself skidding in the opposite direction. 
Learning to stay off the brake, turn the steering 
wheel quickly, push in the clutch, and counter-steer 
in a skid takes a lot of practice. The best place to 
get this practice is on a large driving range or "skid 
pad." 
2.19.3 – Front-wheel Skids 
Driving too fast for conditions causes most front
wheel skids. Other causes include lack of tread on 
the front tires and cargo loaded so not enough 
weight is on the front axle. In a front-wheel skid, the 
front end tends to go in a straight line regardless of 
how much you turn the steering wheel. On a very 
slippery surface, you may not be able to steer 
around a curve or turn. 
When a front-wheel skid occurs, the only way to 
stop the skid is to let the vehicle slow down. Stop 
turning and/or braking so hard. Slow down as 
quickly as possible without skidding. 
Figure 2.19 
Subsections 2.17, 2.18, and 2.19 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Stopping is not always the safest thing to do 
in an emergency. True or False? 
What are some advantages of going right 
instead of left around an obstacle? 
What is an "escape ramp?" 
If a tire blows out, you should put the brakes 
on hard to stop quickly. True or False? 
How do you know if your vehicle has antilock 
brakes? 
What is the proper braking technique when 
driving a vehicle with antilock brakes? 
How do antilock brakes help you? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.17, 2.18, 
and 2.19. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-37  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
2.20 – Accident Procedures 
When you're in an accident and not seriously hurt, 
you need to act to prevent further damage or injury. 
The basic steps to be taken at any accident are to: 
Protect the area. 
Notify authorities. 
Care for the injured. 
2.20.1 – Protect the Area 
The first thing to do at an accident scene is to keep 
another accident from happening in the same spot. 
To protect the accident area: 
If your vehicle is involved in the accident, try to get 
it to the side of the road. This will help prevent 
another accident and allow traffic to move. 
If you're stopping to help, park away from the 
accident. The area immediately around the 
accident will be needed for emergency vehicles. 
Put on your flashers. 
Set out reflective triangles to warn other traffic. 
Make sure other drivers can see them in time to 
avoid the accident. 
2.20.2 – Notify Authorities 
If you have a cell phone or CB, call for assistance 
before you get out of your vehicle. If not, wait until 
after the accident scene has been properly 
protected, then phone or send someone to phone 
the police. Try to determine where you are so you 
can give the exact location. 
2.20.3 – Care for the Injured 
If a qualified person is at the accident and helping 
the injured, stay out of the way unless asked to 
assist. Otherwise, do the best you can to help any 
injured parties. Here are some simple steps to follow 
in giving assistance: 
Don't move a severely injured person unless the 
danger of fire or passing traffic makes it necessary. 
Stop heavy bleeding by applying direct pressure to 
the wound. 
Keep the injured person warm. 
2.21 – Fires 
Truck fires can cause damage and injury. Learn the 
causes of fires and how to prevent them. Know what 
to do to extinguish fires. 
2.21.1 – Causes of Fire 
The following are some causes of vehicle fires: 
After Accidents. Spilled fuel, improper use of 
flares. 
Tires. Under-inflated tires and duals that touch. 
Electrical System. Short circuits due to damaged 
insulation, loose connections. 
Fuel. Driver smoking, improper fueling, loose fuel 
connections. 
Cargo. Flammable cargo, improperly sealed or 
loaded cargo, poor ventilation. 
2.21.2 – Fire Prevention 
Pay attention to the following: 
Vehicle Inspection. Make a complete inspection 
of the electrical, fuel, and exhaust systems, tires, 
and cargo. Be sure to check that the fire 
extinguisher is charged. 
En Route Inspection. Check the tires, wheels, 
and truck body for signs of heat whenever you stop 
during a trip. 
Follow Safe Procedures. Follow correct safety 
procedures for fueling the vehicle, using brakes, 
handling flares, and other activities that can cause 
a fire. 
Monitoring. Check the instruments and gauges 
often for signs of overheating and use the mirrors 
to look for signs of smoke from tires or the vehicle. 
Caution. Use normal caution in handling anything 
flammable. 
2.21.3 – Fire Fighting 
Knowing how to fight fires is important. Drivers who 
didn’t know what to do have made fires worse. Know 
how the fire extinguisher works. Study the 
instructions printed on the extinguisher before you 
need it. Here are some procedures to follow in case 
of fire. 
Pull Off the Road. The first step is to get the vehicle 
off the road and stop. In doing so: 
Park in an open area, away from buildings, trees, 
brush, other vehicles, or anything that might catch 
fire. 
Don't pull into a service station! 
Notify emergency services of your problem and 
your location. 
Keep the Fire from Spreading. Before trying to put 
out the fire, make sure that it doesn't spread any 
further. 
With an engine fire, turn off the engine as soon as 
you can. Don't open the hood if you can avoid it. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-38  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Shoot foam through louvers, radiator, or from the 
vehicle’s underside. 
For a cargo fire in a van or box trailer, keep the 
doors shut, especially if your cargo contains 
hazardous materials. Opening the van doors will 
supply the fire with oxygen and can cause it to 
burn very fast. 
Extinguish the Fire. Here are some rules to follow 
in putting out a fire: 
When using the extinguisher, stay as far away from 
the fire as possible. 
Aim at the source or base of the fire, not up in the 
flames. 
Use the Right Fire Extinguisher 
Figures 2.20 and 2.21 detail the type of fire 
extinguisher to use by class of fire. 
The B:C type fire extinguisher is designed to work 
on electrical fires and burning liquids.  
The A:B:C type is designed to work on burning 
wood, paper, and cloth as well. 
Water can be used on wood, paper, or cloth, but 
don't use water on an electrical fire (can cause 
shock) or a gasoline fire (it will spread the flames). 
A burning tire must be cooled. Lots of water may 
be required. 
If you're not sure what to use, especially on a 
hazardous materials fire, wait for firefighters. 
Position yourself upwind. Let the wind carry the 
extinguisher to the fire. 
Continue until whatever was burning has been 
cooled. Absence of smoke or flame does not mean 
the fire cannot restart. 
Class/Type of Fires 
Class 
Type 
A 
Wood, Paper, Ordinary Combustibles 
Extinguish by Cooling and 
Quenching Using Water or Dry 
Chemicals 
B 
Gasoline, Oil, Grease, Other Greasy 
Liquids 
Extinguish by Smothering, Cooling 
or Heat Shielding using carbon 
Dioxide or Dry Chemicals  
C 
Electrical Equipment Fires 
Extinguish with Non-conducting 
Agents such as Carbon Dioxide or 
Dry Chemicals. DO NOT USE 
WATER. 
D 
Fires in Combustible Metals 
Extinguish by Using Specialized 
Extinguishing Powders 
Figure 2.20 
Class of Fire/Type of Extinguisher 
Class of Fire 
Fire Extinguisher Type 
B or C 
Regular Dry Chemical 
A, B, C, or D 
Multi-Purpose Dry Chemical 
D 
Purple K Dry Chemical 
B or C 
KCL Dry Chemical 
D 
Dry Powder Special 
Compound 
B or C 
Carbon Dioxide (Dry) 
B or C 
Halogenated Agent (Gas) 
A 
Water 
A 
Water With Anti-Freeze 
A or B 
Water, Loaded Steam Style 
B, On Some A 
Foam 
Figure 2.21 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-39  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Subsections 2.20 and 2.21 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
What are some things to do at an accident 
scene to prevent another accident? 
Name two causes of tire fires. 
What kinds of fires is a B:C extinguisher not 
good for? 
When using your extinguisher, should you get 
as close as possible to the fire? 
Name some causes of vehicle fires. 
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.20 and 2.21. 
2.22 – Alcohol, Other Drugs, and 
Driving 
2.22.1 – Alcohol and Driving 
Drinking alcohol and then driving is very dangerous 
and a serious problem. People who drink alcohol 
are involved in traffic accidents resulting in over 
20,000 deaths every year. Alcohol impairs muscle 
coordination, reaction time, depth perception, and 
night vision. It also affects the parts of the brain that 
control judgment and inhibition. For some people, 
one drink is all it takes to show signs of impairment. 
How Alcohol Works. Alcohol goes directly into the 
blood stream and is carried to the brain. After 
passing through the brain, a small percentage is 
removed in urine, perspiration, and by breathing, 
while the rest is carried to the liver. The liver can 
only process one-third an ounce of alcohol per hour, 
which is considerably less than the alcohol in a 
standard drink. This is a fixed rate, so only time, not 
black coffee or a cold shower, will sober you up. If 
you have drinks faster than your body can get rid of 
them, you will have more alcohol in your body, and 
your driving will be more affected. The Blood 
Alcohol Concentration (BAC) commonly measures 
the amount of alcohol in your body. See Figure 2.22. 
What Is a Drink? 
It is the alcohol in drinks that affects human 
performance. It doesn't make any difference 
whether that alcohol comes from "a couple of 
beers,” or from two glasses of wine, or two shots 
of hard liquor. Approximate Blood Alcohol 
Content 
Body Weight in Pounds 
Drinks 
100 
120 
140 
160 
Effects 
180 
0 
.00 
.00 
.00 
.00 
.00 
200 
.00 
220 
.00 
240 
.00 
Only Safe 
Driving Limit 
1 
.04 
.03 
.03 
.02 
.02 
2 
.08 
.06 
.05 
.05 
.04 
.02 
.04 
.02 
.03 
.02 
.03 
Impairment 
Begins 
3 
.11 
.09 
.08 
.07 
.06 
4 
.15 
.12 
.11 
.09 
.06 
.05 
.05 
.08 
5 
.19 
.16 
.13 
.12 
.11 
.08 
.09 
.07 
.09 
.06 
.08 
Driving Skills Significantly 
Affected 
6 
.23 
.19 
.16 
.14 
.13 
.11 
.10 
.09 
7 
.26 
.22 
.19 
.16 
.15 
8 
.30 
.25 
.21 
.19 
.13 
.12 
.11 
.17 
9 
1
0 
.34 
.28 
.24 
.21 
.19 
.15 
.17 
.14 
.15 
.13 
.14 
Legally Intoxicated 
Criminal Penalties 
.38 
.31 
.27 
.23 
.21 
.19 
.17 
.16 
Subtract .01% for each 40 minutes of drinking. One 
drink is 1.5 oz. of 80 proof liquor, 12 oz. of beer, or 5 
oz. of table wine. 
Figure 2.22 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-40  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
All of the following drinks contain the same amount 
of alcohol: 
A 12-ounce glass of 5% beer. 
A 5-ounce glass of 12% wine. 
A 1 1/2-ounce shot of 80 proof liquor.  
What Determines Blood Alcohol Concentration? 
BAC is determined by the amount of alcohol you 
drink (more alcohol means higher BAC), how fast 
you drink (faster drinking means higher BAC), and 
your weight (a small person doesn't have to drink as 
much to reach the same BAC). 
Alcohol and the Brain. Alcohol affects more and 
more of the brain as BAC builds up. The first part of 
the brain affected controls judgment and self
control. One of the bad things about this is it can 
keep drinkers from knowing they are getting drunk. 
And, of course, good judgment and self-control are 
absolutely necessary for safe driving. 
As BAC continues to build up, muscle control, 
vision, and coordination are affected more and 
more. Effects on driving may include:  
Straddling lanes. 
Quick, jerky starts. 
Not signaling, failure to use lights. 
Running stop signs and red lights. 
Improper passing (See Figure 2.23). 
These effects mean increased chances of a crash 
and chances of losing your driver's license. Accident 
statistics show that the chance of a crash is much 
greater for drivers who have been drinking than for 
drivers who have not. 
How Alcohol Affects Driving. All drivers are 
affected by drinking alcohol. Alcohol affects 
judgment, vision, coordination, and reaction time. It 
causes serious driving errors, such as: 
Increased reaction time to hazards. 
Driving too fast or too slow. 
Driving in the wrong lane. 
Running over the curb. 
Weaving. 
Effects Of Increasing  
Blood Alcohol Content 
Blood Alcohol Content is the amount of alcohol in 
your blood recorded in milligrams of alcohol per 
100 milliliters of blood. Your BAC depends on the 
amount of blood (which increases with weight) and 
the amount of alcohol you consume over time (how 
fast you drink). The faster you drink, the higher your 
BAC, as the liver can only handle about one drink 
per hour—the rest builds up in your blood. 
BAC  
Effects on Body 
Effects on 
Driving Condition 
.02 
Mellow feeling, 
slight body warmth. 
Less inhibited. 
.05 
Noticeable 
relaxation. 
Less alert, less 
self-focused, 
coordination 
impairment begins. 
.08 
Definite impairment 
in coordination & 
judgment  
Drunk driving limit, 
impaired 
coordination & 
judgment. 
.10* 
Reduction in 
reaction time. 
Noisy, possible 
embarrassing 
behavior, mood 
swings. 
.15 
Impaired balance & 
movement, clearly 
drunk. 
Unable to drive. 
.30 
Many lose 
consciousness.  
.40 
Most lose 
consciousness, 
some die. 
.50 
Breathing stops, 
many die.  
BAC of .10 means that 1/10 of 1 % (or 1/1000) of 
your total blood content is alcohol. 
Figure 2.23 
2.22.2 – Other Drugs 
Besides alcohol, other legal and illegal drugs are 
being used more often. Laws prohibit possession or 
use of many drugs while on duty. They prohibit 
being under the influence of any "controlled 
substance," amphetamines (including "pep pills," 
“uppers,” and "bennies"), narcotics, or any other 
substance, which can make the driver unsafe. This 
could include a variety of prescription and over-the
counter drugs (cold medicines), which may make 
the driver drowsy or otherwise affect safe driving 
ability. However, possession and use of a drug 
given to a driver by a doctor is permitted if the doctor 
informs the driver that it will not affect safe driving 
ability. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-41  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Pay attention to warning labels for legitimate drugs 
and medicines, and to doctor's orders regarding 
possible effects. Stay away from illegal drugs.  
Don't use any drug that hides fatigue--the only cure 
for fatigue is rest. Alcohol can make the effects of 
other drugs much worse. The safest rule is don't mix 
drugs with driving at all. 
Use of drugs can lead to traffic accidents resulting 
in death, injury, and property damage. Furthermore, 
it can lead to arrest, fines, and jail sentences. It can 
also mean the end of a person's driving career. 
2.22.3 – Illness 
Once in a while, you may become so ill that you 
cannot operate a motor vehicle safely. If this 
happens to you, you must not drive. However, in 
case of an emergency, you may drive to the nearest 
place where you can safely stop. 
2.23 – Hazardous Materials Rules For 
All Commercial Drivers 
All drivers should know something about hazardous 
materials. You must be able to recognize hazardous 
cargo, and you must know whether or not you can 
haul it without having a hazardous materials 
endorsement on your CDL license. 
Class 
Hazard Class Definitions 
Class Name 
Example 
1 
Explosives 
Ammunition, 
Dynamite, 
Fireworks 
2 
Gases 
Propane, Oxygen, 
Helium 
3 
Flammable  
Gasoline, Acetone 
4 
Flammable 
Solids 
Matches, Fuses 
5 
Oxidizers 
Ammonium 
Nitrate, Hydrogen 
Peroxide 
6 
Poisons 
Pesticides, 
Arsenic 
7 
Radioactive 
Uranium, 
Plutonium 
8 
Corrosives 
Hydrochloric Acid, 
Battery  Fluid 
9 
Miscellaneous 
Hazardous 
Materials 
Formaldehyde, 
Asbestos 
Hair
None 
ORM-D (Other 
Regulated 
Material
Domestic) 
 Spray
 or 
Charcoal 
None 
Combustible 
Liquids 
Fuel Oils, Lighter 
Fluid 
Figure 2.24 
2.23.1 – What Are Hazardous Materials? 
Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk 
to health, safety, and property during transportation. 
See Figure 2.24. 
2.23.2 – Why Are There Rules? 
You must follow the many rules about transporting 
hazardous materials. The intent of the rules is to:  
Contain the product. 
Communicate the risk. 
Ensure safe drivers and equipment. 
To Contain the Product. Many hazardous 
products can injure or kill on contact. To protect 
drivers and others from contact, the rules tell 
shippers how to package safely. Similar rules tell 
drivers how to load, transport, and unload bulk 
tanks. These are containment rules. 
To Communicate the Risk. The shipper uses a 
shipping paper and diamond shaped hazard labels 
to warn dockworkers and drivers of the risk. 
After an accident or hazardous material spill or leak, 
you may be injured and unable to communicate the 
hazards of the materials you are transporting. 
Firefighters and police can prevent or reduce the 
amount of damage or injury at the scene if they 
know what hazardous materials are being 
transported. Your life, and the lives of others, may 
depend on quickly locating the hazardous materials 
shipping papers. For that reason, you must identify 
shipping papers related to hazardous materials or 
keep them on top of other shipping papers. You 
must also keep shipping papers: 
In a pouch on the driver's door, or 
In clear view within reach while driving, or 
On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle. 
2.23.3 – Lists of Regulated Products 
Placards are used to warn others of hazardous 
materials. Placards are signs put on the outside of 
a vehicle that identify the hazard class of the cargo. 
A placarded vehicle must have at least four identical 
placards. They are put on the front, rear, and both 
sides. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-42  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Placards must be readable from all four directions. 
They must be at least 9.84” (250mm) inches square, 
turned upright on a point, in a diamond shape. 
Cargo tanks and other bulk packaging display the 
identification number of their contents on placards 
or orange panels. 
Identification Numbers are a four digit code used 
by first responders to identify hazardous materials. 
An identification number may be used to identify 
more than one chemical on shipping papers. The 
identification number will be preceded by the letters 
“NA” or “UN”. The US DOT Emergency Response 
Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals and the 
identification numbers assigned to them. 
Not all vehicles carrying hazardous materials need 
to have placards. The rules about placards are 
given in Section 9 of this manual. You can drive a 
vehicle that carries hazardous materials if it does 
not require placards. If it requires placards, you 
cannot drive it unless your driver license has the 
hazardous materials endorsement. See Figure 
2.25. 
Figure 2.25 
The rules require all drivers of placarded vehicles to 
learn how to safely load and transport hazardous 
products. They must have a commercial driver 
license with the hazardous materials endorsement. 
To get the required endorsement, you must pass a 
written test on material found in Section 9 of this 
manual. A tank endorsement is required for any 
commercial vehicle that is designed to transport any 
liquid or gaseous materials in a tank or tanks having 
an individual rated capacity of more than 119 
gallons and an aggregate capacity of 1,000 gallons 
or more that is either permanently or temporarily 
attached to the vehicle or chassis.  The liquid or gas 
does not have to be a hazardous material.  
Drivers who need the hazardous materials 
endorsement must learn the placard rules. If you do 
not know if your vehicle needs placards, ask your 
employer. Never drive a vehicle needing placards 
unless you have the hazardous materials 
endorsement. To do so is a crime. When stopped, 
you will be cited and you will not be allowed to drive 
your truck.  It will cost you time and money. A failure 
to placard when needed may risk your life and 
others if you have an accident. Emergency help will 
not know of your hazardous cargo. 
Hazardous materials drivers must also know which 
products they can load together, and which they 
cannot. These rules are also in Section 9. Before 
loading a truck with more than one type of product, 
you must know if it is safe to load them together. If 
you do not know, ask your employer and consult the 
regulations. 
Subsections 2.22 and 2.23 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Common medicines for colds can make you 
sleepy. True or False? 
2. Coffee and a little fresh air will help a drinker 
sober up. True or False? 
3. What is a hazardous materials placard? 
4. Why are placards used? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read subsections 2.22 and 
2.23. 
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-43  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
Section 2 – Driving Safely 
Page 2-2  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 3  
TRANSPORTING CARGO 
SAFELY 
This Section Covers 
• Inspecting Cargo 
• Cargo Weight and Balance 
• Securing Cargo 
• Cargo Needing Special Attention 
This section tells you about hauling cargo safely. 
You must understand basic cargo safety rules to get 
a CDL. 
If you load cargo wrong or do not secure it, it can be 
a danger to others and yourself. Loose cargo that 
falls off a vehicle can cause traffic problems and 
others could be hurt or killed. Loose cargo could hurt 
or kill you during a quick stop or crash. Your vehicle 
could be damaged by an overload. Steering could 
be affected by how a vehicle is loaded, making it 
more difficult to control the vehicle. 
Whether or not you load and secure the cargo 
yourself, you are responsible for: 
Inspecting your cargo. 
Recognizing overloads and poorly balanced 
weight. 
Knowing your cargo is properly secured and does 
not obscure your view ahead or to the sides. 
Knowing your cargo does not restrict your access 
to emergency equipment. 
If you intend to carry hazardous material that 
requires placards on your vehicle, you will also need 
to 
have a hazardous materials endorsement. 
Section 9 of this manual has the information you 
need to pass the hazardous materials test. 
3.1 – Inspecting Cargo 
As part of your Vehicle inspection, make sure the 
truck is not overloaded and the cargo is balanced 
and secured properly. 
After Starting. Inspect the cargo and its securing 
devices again within the first 50 miles after 
beginning a trip. Make any adjustments needed.  
Re-check. Re-check the cargo and securing 
devices as often as necessary during a trip to keep 
the load secure. You need to inspect again: 
After you have driven for 3 hours or 150 miles.  
After every break you take during driving. 
Federal, state, and local regulations for commercial 
vehicle weight, securing cargo, covering loads, and 
where you can drive large vehicles vary from place 
to place. Know the rules where you will be driving. 
3.2 – Weight and Balance 
You are responsible for not being overloaded. The 
following are some definitions of weight you should 
know. 
3.2.1 – Definitions You Should Know 
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR). The value 
specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight 
of a single vehicle. 
Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR). The 
value specified by the manufacturer of the power 
unit, if the value is displayed on the Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) certification 
label; or the sum of the gross vehicle weight ratings 
(GVWRs) or the gross vehicle weights (GVWs) of 
the power unit and the towed unit(s), or any 
combination thereof, that produces the highest 
value. 
(The underlined and italicized text above is for 
use by roadside enforcement only to determine 
whether the driver/vehicle is subject to CDL 
regulations.  It is not used to determine whether 
a vehicle is representative for the purposes of 
Skills testing). 
Axle Weight. The weight transmitted to the ground 
by one axle or one set of axles. 
Tire Load. The maximum safe weight a tire can 
carry at a specified pressure. This rating is stated on 
the side of each tire. 
Suspension Systems. Suspension systems have 
a manufacturer's weight capacity rating. 
Coupling Device Capacity. Coupling devices are 
rated for the maximum weight they can pull and/or 
carry. 
3.2.2 – Legal Weight Limits 
You must keep weights within legal limits. States 
have maximums for GVWRs, GCWRs, and axle 
weights. Often, maximum axle weights are set by a 
bridge formula. A bridge formula permits less 
maximum axle weight for axles that are closer 
Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely 
Page 3-1  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
together. This is to prevent overloading bridges and 
roadways. 
Overloading can have bad effects on steering, 
braking, and speed control. Overloaded trucks have 
to go very slowly on upgrades. Worse, they may 
gain too much speed on downgrades. Stopping 
distance increases. Brakes can fail when forced to 
work too hard. 
During bad weather or in mountains, it may not be 
safe to operate at legal maximum weights. Take this 
into account before driving. 
3.2.3 – Don't Be Top-heavy 
The height of the vehicle's center of gravity is very 
important for safe handling. A high center of gravity 
(cargo piled up high or heavy cargo on top) means 
you are more likely to tip over. It is most dangerous 
in curves, or if you have to swerve to avoid a hazard. 
It is very important to distribute the cargo so it is as 
low as possible. Put the heaviest parts of the cargo 
under the lightest parts. 
3.2.4 – Balance the Weight 
Poor weight balance can make vehicle handling 
unsafe. Too much weight on the steering axle can 
cause hard steering. It can damage the steering 
axle and tires. Under-loaded front axles (caused by 
shifting weight too far to the rear) can make the 
steering axle weight too light to steer safely. Too 
little weight on the driving axles can cause poor 
traction. The drive wheels may spin easily. During 
bad weather, the truck may not be able to keep 
going. Weight that is loaded so there is a high center 
of gravity causes greater chance of rollover. On flat 
bed vehicles, there is also a greater chance that the 
load will shift to the side or fall off. See Figure 3.1. 
3.3 – Securing Cargo 
3.3.1 – Blocking and Bracing 
Blocking is used in the front, back, and/or sides of a 
piece of cargo to keep it from sliding. Blocking is 
shaped to fit snugly against cargo. It is secured to 
the cargo deck to prevent cargo movement. Bracing 
is also used to prevent movement of cargo. Bracing 
goes from the upper part of the cargo to the floor 
and/or walls of the cargo compartment. 
Figure 3.1 
3.3.2 – Cargo Tie-down 
On flatbed trailers or trailers without sides, cargo 
must be secured to keep it from shifting or falling off. 
In closed vans, tie-downs can also be important to 
prevent cargo shifting that may affect the handling 
of the vehicle. Tie-downs must be of the proper type 
and proper strength. Federal regulations require the 
aggregate working load limit of any securement 
system used to secure an article or group of articles 
against movement must be at least one-half times 
the weight of the article or group of articles. Proper 
tie-down equipment must be used, including ropes, 
straps, chains, and tensioning devices (winches, 
ratchets, clinching components). Tie-downs must 
be attached to the vehicle correctly (hooks, bolts, 
rails, rings). See figure 3.2. 
Figure 3.2 
Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely 
Page 3-2  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Cargo should have at least one tie-down for each 
ten feet of cargo. Make sure you have enough tie
downs to meet this need. No matter how small the 
cargo, it should have at least two tie-downs. 
There are special requirements for securing various 
heavy pieces of metal. Find out what they are if you 
are to carry such loads. 
3.3.3 – Header Boards 
Front-end header boards ("headache racks") 
protect you from your cargo in case of a crash or 
emergency stop. Make sure the front-end structure 
is in good condition. The front-end structure should 
block the forward movement of any cargo you carry. 
3.3.4 – Covering Cargo 
There are two basic reasons for covering cargo: 
To protect people from spilled cargo. 
To protect the cargo from weather. 
Spill protection is a safety requirement in many 
states. Be familiar with the laws in the states you 
drive in. 
You should look at your cargo covers in the mirrors 
from time to time while driving. A flapping cover can 
tear loose, uncovering the cargo, and possibly block 
your view or someone else's. 
3.3.5 – Sealed and Containerized Loads 
Containerized loads generally are used when freight 
is carried part way by rail or ship. Delivery by truck 
occurs at the beginning and/or end of the journey. 
Some containers have their own tiedown devices or 
locks that attach directly to a special frame. Others 
have to be loaded onto flatbed trailers. They must 
be properly secured just like any other cargo. 
You cannot inspect sealed loads, but you should 
check that you don't exceed gross weight and axle 
weight limits. 
3.4 – Cargo Needing Special Attention 
3.4.1 – Dry Bulk 
Dry bulk tanks require special care because they 
have a high center of gravity, and the load can shift. 
Be extremely cautious (slow and careful) going 
around curves and making sharp turns. 
3.4.2 – Hanging Meat 
Hanging meat (suspended beef, pork, lamb) in a 
refrigerated truck can be a very unstable load with a 
high center of gravity. Particular caution is needed 
on sharp curves such as off ramps and on ramps. 
Go slowly. 
3.4.3 – Livestock 
Livestock can move around in a trailer, causing 
unsafe handling. With less than a full load, use false 
bulkheads to keep livestock bunched together. 
Even when bunched, special care is necessary 
because livestock can lean on curves. This shifts 
the center of gravity and makes rollover more likely. 
3.4.4 – Oversized Loads 
Over-length, over-width, and/or overweight loads 
require special transit permits. Driving is usually 
limited to certain times. Special equipment may be 
necessary such as "wide load" signs, flashing lights, 
flags, etc. Such loads may require a police escort or 
pilot vehicles bearing warning signs and/or flashing 
lights. These special loads require special driving 
care. 
Section 3 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What four things related to cargo are drivers 
responsible for? 
2. How often must you stop while on the road to 
check your cargo? 
3. How is Gross Combination Weight Rating 
different from Gross Combination Weight? 
4. Name two situations where legal maximum 
weights may not be safe. 
5. What can happen if you don't have enough 
weight on the front axle? 
6. What is the minimum number of tie-downs for 
any flatbed load? 
7. What is the minimum number of tie-downs for a 
20-foot load? 
8. Name the two basic reasons for covering cargo 
on an open bed. 
9. What must you check before transporting a 
sealed load? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read Section 3. 
Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely 
Page 3-3  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK. 
Section 3 - Transporting Cargo Safely 
Page 3-2  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 4  
TRANSPORTING 
PASSENGERS SAFELY 
This Section Covers 
• Vehicle Inspection 
• Loading 
• On the Road 
• After-trip Vehicle Inspection 
• Prohibited Practices 
• Use of Brake-door Interlocks  
Bus drivers must have a commercial driver license 
if they drive a vehicle designed to seat more than 16 
or more persons, including the driver.  
Bus drivers must have a passenger endorsement 
on their commercial driver license. To get the 
endorsement you must pass a knowledge test on 
Sections 2 and 4 of this manual. (If your bus has air 
brakes, you must also pass a knowledge test on 
Section 5.) You must also pass the skills tests 
required for the class of vehicle you drive.  
4.1 – Vehicle Inspection 
Before driving your bus, you must be sure it is safe. 
You must review the inspection report made by the 
previous driver. Only if defects reported earlier have 
been certified as repaired or not needed to be 
repaired, should you sign the previous driver's 
report. This is your certification that the defects 
reported earlier have been fixed. 
4.1.1 – Vehicle Systems 
Make sure these things are in good working order 
before driving: 
Service brakes, including air hose couplings (if 
your bus has a trailer or semitrailer). 
Parking brake. 
Steering mechanism. 
Lights and reflectors. 
Tires (front wheels must not have recapped or re
grooved tires). 
Horn. 
Windshield wiper or wipers. 
Rear-vision mirror or mirrors. 
Coupling devices (if present). 
Wheels and rims. 
Emergency equipment. 
Make sure your bus has the fire extinguisher and 
emergency reflectors (3 reflective triangles or at 
least 6 fusees or 3 liquid burning flares) required 
by law. The bus must also have spare electrical 
fuses, unless equipped with circuit breakers. 
4.1.2 – Access Doors and Panels 
As you check the outside of the bus, close any open 
emergency exits. Also, close any open access 
panels (for baggage, restroom service, engine, etc.) 
before driving. 
4.1.3 – Bus Interior 
People sometimes damage unattended buses. 
Always check the interior of the bus before driving 
to ensure rider safety. Aisles and stairwells should 
always be clear. The following parts of your bus 
must be in safe working condition:  
Each handhold and railing. 
Floor covering. 
Signaling devices, including the restroom 
emergency buzzer, if the bus has a restroom. 
Emergency exit handles. 
The seats must be safe for riders. All seats must be 
securely fastened to the bus. 
Never drive with an open emergency exit door or 
window. The "Emergency Exit" sign on an 
emergency door must be clearly visible. If there is a 
red emergency door light, it must work. Turn it on at 
night or any other time you use your outside lights. 
4.1.4 – Roof Hatches 
You may lock some emergency roof hatches in a 
partly open position for fresh air. Do not leave them 
open as a regular practice. Keep in mind the bus's 
higher clearance while driving with them open. 
4.1.5 – Use Your Seatbelt! 
The driver's seat should have a seat belt. Always 
use it for safety. 
4.2 – Loading and Trip Start 
Do not allow riders to leave carry-on baggage in a 
doorway or aisle. There should be nothing in the 
aisle that might trip other riders. Secure baggage 
and freight in ways that avoid damage and: 
Allow the driver to move freely and easily. 
Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely 
Page 4-1 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Allow riders to exit by any window or door in an 
emergency. 
Protect riders from injury if carry-ons fall or shift.  
4.2.1 – Hazardous Materials 
Watch for cargo or baggage containing hazardous 
materials. Most hazardous materials cannot be 
carried on a bus. 
The Federal Hazardous Materials Table shows 
which materials are hazardous. They pose a risk to 
health, safety, and property during transportation. 
The rules require shippers to mark containers of 
hazardous material with the material's name, 
identification number, and hazard label. There are 
nine different four-inch, diamond-shaped hazard 
labels. See Figure 4.1. Watch for the diamond
shaped labels. Do not transport any hazardous 
material unless you are sure the rules allow it. 
Class 
Hazard Class Definitions 
Class Name 
Example 
1 
Explosives 
Ammunition, 
Dynamite, 
Fireworks 
Propane, Oxygen, 
Helium 
2 
3 
Gases 
Flammable  
4 
Flammable 
Solids 
Gasoline, 
Acetone 
Matches, Fuses 
5 
Oxidizers 
Ammonium 
Nitrate, Hydrogen 
Peroxide 
6 
Poisons 
Pesticides, 
Arsenic 
7 
Radioactive 
Uranium, 
Plutonium 
8 
Corrosives 
Hydrochloric Acid, 
Battery Acid 
9 
Miscellaneous 
Hazardous 
Materials 
Formaldehyde, 
Asbestos 
None 
ORM-D (Other 
Regulated 
Material
Domestic) 
Hair Spray or 
Charcoal 
None 
Combustible 
Liquids 
Fuel Oils, Lighter 
Fluid 
Figure 4.1 
4.2.2 – Forbidden Hazardous Materials 
Buses may carry small-arms ammunition labeled 
ORM-D, emergency hospital supplies, and drugs. 
You can carry small amounts of some other 
hazardous materials if the shipper cannot send 
them any other way. Buses must never carry: 
Division 2.3 poison gas, liquid Class 6 poison, tear 
gas, irritating material. 
More than 100 pounds of solid Class 6 poisons. 
Explosives in the space occupied by people, 
except small arms ammunition. 
Labeled radioactive materials in the space 
occupied by people. 
More than 500 pounds total of allowed hazardous 
materials, and no more than 100 pounds of any 
one class. 
Riders sometimes board a bus with an unlabeled 
hazardous material. Do not allow riders to carry on 
common hazards such as car batteries or gasoline. 
4.2.3 – Standee Line 
No rider may stand forward of the rear of the driver's 
seat. Buses designed to allow standing must have 
a two-inch line on the floor or some other means of 
showing riders where they cannot stand. This is 
called the standee line. All standing riders must stay 
behind it. 
4.2.4 – At Your Destination 
When arriving at the destination or intermediate 
stops announce: 
The location. 
Reason for stopping. 
Next departure time. 
Bus number. 
Remind riders to take carry-ons with them if they get 
off the bus. If the aisle is on a lower level than the 
seats, remind riders of the step-down. It is best to 
tell them before coming to a complete stop. 
Charter bus drivers should not allow riders on the 
bus until departure time. This will help prevent theft 
or vandalism of the bus. 
4.3 – On the Road 
4.3.1 – Passenger Supervision 
Many charter and intercity carriers have passenger 
comfort and safety rules. Mention rules about 
smoking, drinking, or use of radio and tape players 
at the start of the trip. Explaining the rules at the 
start will help to avoid trouble later on. 
While driving, scan the interior of your bus as well 
as the road ahead, to the sides, and to the rear. You 
Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely 
Page 4-2 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
may have to remind riders about rules, or to keep 
arms and heads inside the bus. 
4.3.2 – At Stops 
Riders can stumble when getting on or off, and 
when the bus starts or stops. Caution riders to watch 
their step when leaving the bus. Wait for them to sit 
down or brace themselves before starting. Starting 
and stopping should be as smooth as possible to 
avoid rider injury. 
Occasionally, you may have a drunk or disruptive 
rider. You must ensure this rider's safety as well as 
that of others. Don't discharge such riders where it 
would be unsafe for them. It may be safer at the next 
scheduled stop or a well-lighted area where there 
are other people. Many carriers have guidelines for 
handling disruptive riders. 
4.3.3 – Common Accidents 
The Most Common Bus Accidents. Bus accidents 
often happen at intersections. Use caution, even if 
a signal or stop sign controls other traffic. School 
and mass transit buses sometimes scrape off 
mirrors or hit passing vehicles when pulling out from 
a bus stop. Remember the clearance your bus 
needs, and watch for poles and tree limbs at stops. 
Know the size of the gap your bus needs to 
accelerate and merge with traffic. Wait for the gap 
to open before leaving the stop. Never assume 
other drivers will brake to give you room when you 
signal or start to pull out. 
4.3.4 – Speed on Curves 
Crashes on curves that kill people and destroy 
buses result from excessive speed, often when rain 
or snow has made the road slippery. Every banked 
curve has a safe "design speed." In good weather, 
the posted speed is safe for cars but it may be too 
high for many buses. With good traction, the bus 
may roll over; with poor traction, it might slide off the 
curve. Reduce speed for curves! If your bus leans 
toward the outside on a banked curve, you are 
driving too fast. 
4.3.5 – Railroad-highway Crossing/ Stops 
Stop at RR Crossings: 
Stop your bus between 15 and 50 feet before 
railroad crossings.  
Listen and look in both directions for trains. You 
should open your forward door if it improves your 
ability to see or hear an approaching train.  
Before crossing after a train has passed, make sure 
there isn't another train coming in the other direction 
on other tracks.  
If your bus has a manual transmission, never 
change gears while crossing the tracks. 
You do not have to stop, but must slow down and 
carefully check for other vehicles: 
At streetcar crossings. 
Where a policeman or flagman is directing traffic. 
If a traffic signal is green. 
At crossings marked as "exempt" or "abandoned." 
4.3.6 – Drawbridges 
Stop at Drawbridges. Stop at drawbridges that do 
not have a signal light or traffic control attendant. 
Stop at least 50 feet before the draw of the bridge. 
Look to make sure the draw is completely closed 
before crossing. You do not need to stop, but must 
slow down and make sure it's safe, when: 
There is a traffic light showing green. 
The bridge has an attendant or traffic officer who 
controls traffic whenever the bridge opens. 
4.4 – After-trip Vehicle Inspection 
Inspect your bus at the end of each shift. If you work 
for an interstate carrier, you must complete a written 
inspection report for each bus driven. The report 
must specify each bus and list any defect that would 
affect safety or result in a breakdown. If there are no 
defects, the report should say so. 
Riders sometimes damage safety-related parts 
such as handholds, seats, emergency exits, and 
windows. If you report this damage at the end of a 
shift, mechanics can make repairs before the bus 
goes out again. Mass transit drivers should also 
make sure passenger signaling devices and brake
door interlocks work properly. 
4.5 – Prohibited Practices 
Avoid fueling your bus with riders on board unless 
absolutely necessary. Never refuel in a closed 
building with riders on board. 
Don't talk with riders, or engage in any other 
distracting activity, while driving. 
Do not tow or push a disabled bus with riders aboard 
the vehicle, unless getting off would be unsafe. Only 
tow or push the bus to the nearest safe spot to 
discharge passengers. Follow your employer's 
guidelines on towing or pushing disabled buses. 
Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely 
Page 4-3 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
4.6 – Use of Brake-door Interlocks 
Urban mass transit coaches may have a brake and 
accelerator interlock system. The interlock applies 
the brakes and holds the throttle in idle position 
when the rear door is open. The interlock releases 
when you close the rear door. Do not use this safety 
feature in place of the parking brake. 
Section 4 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Name some things to check in the interior of a 
bus during a Vehicle inspection. 
2. What are some hazardous materials you can 
transport by bus? 
3. What are some hazardous materials you can’t 
transport by bus? 
4. What is a standee line? 
5. Does it matter where you make a disruptive 
passenger get off the bus? 
6. How far from a railroad crossing should you 
stop? 
7. When must you stop before crossing a 
drawbridge? 
8. Describe from memory the “prohibited 
practices” listed in the manual. 
9. The rear door of a transit bus has to be open to 
put on the parking brake. True or False? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read Section 4. 
Section 4 - Transporting Passengers Safely 
Page 4-4 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 5  
AIR BRAKES 
This Section Covers 
• Air Brake System Parts  
• Dual Air Brake Systems 
• Inspecting Air Brakes 
• Using Air Brakes 
This section tells you about air brakes. If you want 
to drive a truck or bus with air brakes, or pull a trailer 
with air brakes, you need to read this section. If you 
want to pull a trailer with air brakes, you also need 
to read Section 6, Combination Vehicles.  
Air brakes use compressed air to make the brakes 
work. Air brakes are a good and safe way of 
stopping large and heavy vehicles, but the brakes 
must be well maintained and used properly. 
Air brakes are really three different braking systems:  
service brake, parking brake, and emergency brake. 
The service brake system applies and releases the 
brakes when you use the brake pedal during 
normal driving. 
The parking brake system applies and releases the 
parking brakes when you use the parking brake 
control. 
The emergency brake system uses parts of the 
service and parking brake systems to stop the 
vehicle in a brake system failure. 
The parts of these systems are discussed in greater 
detail below. 
5.1 – The Parts of an Air Brake System 
There are many parts to an air brake system. You 
should know about the parts discussed here. 
5.1.1 – Air Compressor 
The air compressor pumps air into the air storage 
tanks (reservoirs). The air compressor is connected 
to the engine through gears or a v-belt. The 
compressor may be air cooled or may be cooled by 
the engine cooling system. It may have its own oil 
supply or be lubricated by engine oil. If the 
compressor has its own oil supply, check the oil 
level before driving. 
5.1.2 – Air Compressor Governor 
The governor controls when the air compressor will 
pump air into the air storage tanks. When air tank 
pressure rises to the "cut-out" level (around 125 
pounds per-square-inch or "psi"), the governor 
stops the compressor from pumping air. When the 
tank pressure falls to the "cut-in" pressure (around 
100 psi), the governor allows the compressor to 
start pumping again. 
5.1.3 – Air Storage Tanks 
Air storage tanks are used to hold compressed air. 
The number and size of air tanks varies among 
vehicles. The tanks will hold enough air to allow the 
brakes to be used several times, even if the 
compressor stops working. 
5.1.4 – Air Tank Drains 
Compressed air usually has some water and some 
compressor oil in it, which is bad for the air brake 
system. For example, the water can freeze in cold 
weather and cause brake failure. The water and oil 
tend to collect in the bottom of the air tank. Be sure 
that you drain the air tanks completely. Each air tank 
is equipped with a drain valve in the bottom. There 
are two types: 
Manually operated by turning a quarter turn or by 
pulling a cable. You must drain the tanks yourself 
at the end of each day of driving. See Figure 5.1. 
Automatic--the water and oil are automatically 
expelled. These tanks may be equipped for 
manual draining as well. 
Automatic air tanks are available with electric 
heating devices. These help prevent freezing of the 
automatic drain in cold weather. 
Figure 5.1 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-1 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
5.1.5 – Alcohol Evaporator 
Some air brake systems have an alcohol evaporator 
to put alcohol into the air system. This helps to 
reduce the risk of ice in air brake valves and other 
parts during cold weather. Ice inside the system can 
make the brakes stop working. 
Check the alcohol container and fill up as 
necessary, every day during cold weather. Daily air 
tank drainage is still needed to get rid of water and 
oil. (Unless the system has automatic drain valves.) 
5.1.6 – Safety Valve 
A safety relief valve is installed in the first tank the 
air compressor pumps air to. The safety valve 
protects the tank and the rest of the system from too 
much pressure. The valve is usually set to open at 
150 psi. If the safety valve releases air, something 
is wrong. Have the fault fixed by a mechanic. 
5.1.7 – The Brake Pedal 
You put on the brakes by pushing down the brake 
pedal. (It is also called the foot valve or treadle 
valve.) Pushing the pedal down harder applies more 
air pressure. Letting up on the brake pedal reduces 
the air pressure and releases the brakes. Releasing 
the brakes lets some compressed air go out of the 
system, so the air pressure in the tanks is reduced. 
It must be made up by the air compressor. Pressing 
and releasing the pedal unnecessarily can let air out 
faster than the compressor can replace it. If the 
pressure gets too low, the brakes won't work. 
5.1.8 – Foundation Brakes 
Foundation brakes are used at each wheel. The 
most common type is the s-cam drum brake. The 
parts of the brake are discussed below. 
Brake Drums, Shoes, and Linings. Brake drums 
are located on each end of the vehicle's axles. The 
wheels are bolted to the drums. The braking 
mechanism is inside the drum. To stop, the brake 
shoes and linings are pushed against the inside of 
the drum. This causes friction, which slows the 
vehicle (and creates heat). The heat a drum can 
take without damage depends on how hard and how 
long the brakes are used. Too much heat can make 
the brakes stop working. 
S-cam Brakes. When you push the brake pedal, air 
is let into each brake chamber. Air pressure pushes 
the rod out, moving the slack adjuster, thus twisting 
the brake camshaft. This turns the s-cam (so called 
because it is shaped like the letter "S"). The s-cam 
forces the brake shoes away from one another and 
presses them against the inside of the brake drum. 
When you release the brake pedal, the s-cam 
rotates back and a spring pulls the brake shoes 
away from the drum, letting the wheels roll freely 
again. See Figure 5.2. 
Figure 5.2 
Wedge Brakes. In this type of brake, the brake 
chamber push rod pushes a wedge directly between 
the ends of two brake shoes. This shoves them 
apart and against the inside of the brake drum. 
Wedge brakes may have a single brake chamber, 
or two brake chambers, pushing wedges in at both 
ends of the brake shoes. Wedge type brakes may 
be self-adjusting or may require manual adjustment. 
Disc Brakes. In air-operated disc brakes, air 
pressure acts on a brake chamber and slack 
adjuster, like s-cam brakes. But instead of the s
cam, a "power screw" is used. The pressure of the 
brake chamber on the slack adjuster turns the 
power screw. The power screw clamps the disc or 
rotor between the brake lining pads of a caliper, 
similar to a large c-clamp. 
Wedge brakes and disc brakes are less common 
than s-cam brakes. 
5.1.9 – Supply Pressure Gauges 
All vehicles with air brakes have a pressure gauge 
connected to the air tank. If the vehicle has a dual 
air brake system, there will be a gauge for each half 
of the system. (Or a single gauge with two needles.) 
Dual systems will be discussed later. These gauges 
tell you how much pressure is in the air tanks. 
5.1.10 – Application Pressure Gauge 
This gauge shows how much air pressure you are 
applying to the brakes. (This gauge is not on all 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-2 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
vehicles.) Increasing application pressure to hold 
the same speed means the brakes are fading. You 
should slow down and use a lower gear. The need 
for increased pressure can also be caused by 
brakes out of adjustment, air leaks, or mechanical 
problems. 
5.1.11 – Low Air Pressure Warning 
A low air pressure warning signal is required on 
vehicles with air brakes. A warning signal you can 
see must come on before the air pressure in the 
tanks falls below 55 psi. (Or one half the compressor 
governor cutout pressure on older vehicles.) The 
warning is usually a red light. A buzzer may also 
come on. 
Another type of warning is the "wig wag." This 
device drops a mechanical arm into your view when 
the pressure in the system drops below 55 psi. An 
automatic wig wag will rise out of your view when 
the pressure in the system goes above 55 psi. The 
manual reset type must be placed in the "out of 
view" position manually. It will not stay in place until 
the pressure in the system is above 55 psi. 
On large buses it is common for the low pressure 
warning devices to signal at 80-85 psi. 
5.1.12 – Stop Light Switch 
Drivers behind you must be warned when you put 
your brakes on. The air brake system does this with 
an electric switch that works by air pressure. The 
switch turns on the brake lights when you put on the 
air brakes. 
5.1.13 – Front Brake Limiting Valve 
Some older vehicles (made before 1975) have a 
front brake limiting valve and a control in the cab. 
The control is usually marked "normal" and 
"slippery." When you put the control in the "slippery" 
position, the limiting valve cuts the "normal" air 
pressure to the front brakes by half. Limiting valves 
were used to reduce the chance of the front wheels 
skidding on slippery surfaces. However, they 
actually reduce the stopping power of the vehicle. 
Front wheel braking is good under all conditions. 
Tests have shown front wheel skids from braking 
are not likely even on ice. Make sure the control is 
in the "normal" position to have normal stopping 
power. 
Many vehicles have automatic front wheel limiting 
valves. They reduce the air to the front brakes 
except when the brakes are put on very hard (55 psi 
or more application pressure). These valves cannot 
be controlled by the driver. 
5.1.14 – Spring Brakes 
All trucks, truck tractors, and buses must be 
equipped with emergency brakes and parking 
brakes. They must be held on by mechanical force 
(because air pressure can eventually leak away). 
Spring brakes are usually used to meet these 
needs. When driving, powerful springs are held 
back by air pressure. If the air pressure is removed, 
the springs put on the brakes. A parking brake 
control in the cab allows the driver to let the air out 
of the spring brakes. This lets the springs put the 
brakes on. A leak in the air brake system, which 
causes all the air to be lost, will also cause the 
springs to put on the brakes. 
Tractor and straight truck spring brakes will come 
fully on when air pressure drops to a range of 20 to 
45 psi (typically 20 to 30 psi). Do not wait for the 
brakes to come on automatically. When the low air 
pressure warning light and buzzer first come on, 
bring the vehicle to a safe stop right away, while you 
can still control the brakes. 
The braking power of spring brakes depends on the 
brakes being in adjustment. If the brakes are not 
adjusted properly, neither the regular brakes nor the 
emergency/parking brakes will work right. 
5.1.15 – Parking Brake Controls 
In newer vehicles with air brakes, you put on the 
parking brakes using a diamond-shaped, yellow, 
push-pull control knob. You pull the knob out to put 
the parking brakes (spring brakes) on, and push it 
in to release them. On older vehicles, the parking 
brakes may be controlled by a lever. Use the 
parking brakes whenever you park. 
Caution. Never push the brake pedal down when 
the spring brakes are on. If you do, the brakes could 
be damaged by the combined forces of the springs 
and the air pressure. Many brake systems are 
designed so this will not happen. But not all systems 
are set up that way, and those that are may not 
always work. It is much better to develop the habit 
of not pushing the brake pedal down when the 
spring brakes are on. 
Modulating Control Valves. In some vehicles a 
control handle on the dash board may be used to 
apply the spring brakes gradually. This is called a 
modulating valve. It is spring-loaded so you have a 
feel for the braking action. The more you move the 
control lever, the harder the spring brakes come on. 
They work this way so you can control the spring 
brakes if the service brakes fail. When parking a 
vehicle with a modulating control valve, move the 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-3 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
lever as far as it will go and hold it in place with the 
locking device. 
Dual Parking Control Valves. When main air 
pressure is lost, the spring brakes come on. Some 
vehicles, such as buses, have a separate air tank 
which can be used to release the spring brakes. 
This is so you can move the vehicle in an 
emergency. One of the valves is a push-pull type 
and is used to put on the spring brakes for parking. 
The other valve is spring loaded in the "out" position. 
When you push the control in, air from the separate 
air tank releases the spring brakes so you can 
move. When you release the button, the spring 
brakes come on again. There is only enough air in 
the separate tank to do this a few times. Therefore, 
plan carefully when moving. Otherwise, you may be 
stopped in a dangerous location when the separate 
air supply runs out. See Figure 5.3. 
Figure 5.3 
5.1.16 – Antilock Braking Systems (ABS) 
Truck tractors with air brakes built on or after March 
1, 1997, and other air brakes vehicles, (trucks, 
buses, trailers, and converter dollies) built on or 
after March 1, 1998, are required to be equipped 
with antilock brakes. Many commercial vehicles 
built before these dates have been voluntarily 
equipped with ABS. Check the certification label for 
the date of manufacture to determine if your vehicle 
is equipped with ABS. ABS is a computerized 
system that keeps your wheels from locking up 
during hard brake applications. 
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to 
tell you if something isn’t working. 
Tractors, trucks, and buses will have yellow ABS 
malfunction lamps on the instrument panel. 
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on 
the left side, either on the front or rear corner. 
Dollies manufactured on or after March 1, 1998 are 
required to have a lamp on the left side. 
On newer vehicles, the malfunction lamp comes on 
at start-up for a bulb check, and then goes out 
quickly. On older systems, the lamp could stay on 
until you are driving over five mph.  
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on 
once you are under way, you may have lost ABS 
control at one or more wheels. 
In the case of towed units manufactured before it 
was required by the Department of Transportation, 
it may be difficult to tell if the unit is equipped with 
ABS. Look under the vehicle for the electronic 
control unit (ECU) and wheel speed sensor wires 
coming from the back of the brakes. 
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does 
not decrease or increase your normal braking 
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are 
about to lock up. 
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping 
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under 
control during hard braking 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-4 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 5 – Air Brakes Page 5-5 
Version: July 2022 
 
Figure 5.4 
 
.Subsection 5.1 
Test Your Knowledge 
 
1. Why must air tanks be drained? 
2. What is a supply pressure gauge used for? 
3. All vehicles with air brakes must have a low 
air pressure warning signal. True or False? 
4. What are spring brakes? 
 
5. Front wheel brakes are good under all 
conditions. True or False? 
6. How do you know if your vehicle is 
equipped with antilock brakes? 
 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 5.1. 
 
 
5.2 – Dual Air Brake 
Most heavy-duty vehicles use dual air brake 
systems for safety. A dual air brake system has two 
separate air brake systems, which use a single set 
of brake controls. Each system has its own air tanks, 
hoses, lines, etc. One system typically operates the 
regular brakes on the rear axle or axles. The other 
system operates the regular brakes on the front axle 
 
 
(and possibly one rear axle). Both systems supply 
air to the trailer (if there is one). The first system is  
called the "primary" system. The other is called the 
"secondary" system. See Figure 5.4. 
 
Before driving a vehicle with a dual air system, allow 
time for the air compressor to build up a minimum of 
100 psi pressure in both the primary and secondary 
systems. Watch the primary and secondary air 
pressure gauges (or needles, if the system has two 
needles in one gauge). Pay attention to the low air 
pressure warning light and buzzer. The warning 
light and buzzer should shut off when air pressure 
in both systems rises to a value set by the 
manufacturer. This value must be greater than 55 
psi. 
 
The warning light and buzzer should come on 
before the air pressure drops below 55 psi in either 
system. If this happens while driving, you should 
stop right away and safely park the vehicle. If one 
air system is very low on pressure, either the front 
or the rear brakes will not be operating fully. This 
means it will take you longer to stop. Bring the 
vehicle to a safe stop, and have the air brakes 
system fixed. 
 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
5.3 – Inspecting Air Brake Systems 
You should use the basic seven-step inspection 
procedure described in Section 2 to inspect your 
vehicle. There are more things to inspect on a 
vehicle with air brakes than one without them. 
These things are discussed below, in the order they 
fit into the seven-step method. 
5.3.1 – During Step 2 Engine Compartment 
Checks 
Check Air Compressor Drive Belt (if compressor is 
belt-driven). If the air compressor is belt-driven, 
check the condition and tightness of the belt. It 
should be in good condition. 
5.3.2 – During Step 5 Walk-around Inspection 
Check Slack Adjusters on S-cam Brakes. Park on 
level ground and chock the wheels to prevent the 
vehicle from moving. Release the parking brakes so 
you can move the slack adjusters. Use gloves and 
pull hard on each slack adjuster that you can reach. 
If a slack adjuster moves more than about one inch 
where the push rod attaches to it, it probably needs 
adjustment. Adjust it or have it adjusted. Vehicles 
with too much brake slack can be very hard to stop. 
Out-of-adjustment brakes are the most common 
problem found in roadside inspections. Be safe. 
Check the slack adjusters.  
All vehicles built since 1994 have automatic slack 
adjustors. Even though automatic slack adjustors 
adjust themselves during full brake applications, 
they must be checked. 
Automatic adjusters should not have to be manually 
adjusted except when performing maintenance on 
the brakes and during installation of the slack 
adjusters.  In a vehicle equipped with automatic 
adjusters, when the pushrod stroke exceeds the 
legal brake adjustment limit, it is an indication that a 
mechanical problem exists in the adjuster itself, a 
problem with the related foundation brake 
components, or that the adjuster was improperly 
installed. 
The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster to 
bring a brake pushrod stroke within legal limits is 
generally masking a mechanical problem and is not 
fixing it.
  Further, routine adjustment of most 
automatic adjusters will likely result in premature 
wear of the adjuster itself.  It is recommended that 
when brakes equipped with automatic adjusters are 
found to be out of adjustment, the driver take the 
vehicle to a repair facility as soon as possible to 
have the problem corrected.  
The manual 
adjustment of automatic slack adjusters is 
dangerous because it may give the driver a false 
sense of security regarding the effectiveness of the 
braking system. 
The manual adjustment of an automatic adjuster 
should only be used as a temporary measure to 
correct the adjustment in an emergency situation as 
it is likely the brake will soon be back out of 
adjustment since this procedure usually does not fix 
the underlying adjustment problem.   
(Note:  Automatic slack adjusters are made by 
different manufacturers and do not all operate the 
same.  Therefore, the specific manufacturer’s 
Service Manual should be consulted prior to 
troubleshooting a brake adjustment problem.) 
Check Brake Drums (or Discs), Linings, and 
Hoses. Brake drums (or discs) must not have 
cracks longer than one half the width of the friction 
area. Linings (friction material) must not be loose or 
soaked with oil or grease. They must not be 
dangerously thin. Mechanical parts must be in 
place, not broken or missing. Check the air hoses 
connected to the brake chambers to make sure they 
aren't cut or worn due to rubbing. 
5.3.3 – Step 7 Final Air Brake Check 
Do the following checks instead of the hydraulic 
brake check shown in Section 2, Step 7:  Check 
Brake System. 
Check Air Compressor Governor Cut-in and 
Cut-out Pressures.  
 about 
Pumping by the air 
compressor should start at about 100 psi and stop 
at
125 psi. (Check manufacturer's 
specifications.)  Run the engine at a fast idle. The 
air governor should cut-out the air compressor at 
about the manufacturer's specified pressure. The air 
pressure shown by your gauge(s) will stop rising. 
With the engine idling, step on and off the brake to 
reduce the air tank pressure. The compressor 
should cut-in at about the manufacturer's specified 
cut-in pressure. The pressure should begin to rise. 
If the air governor does not work as described 
above, it may need to be fixed. A governor that does 
not work properly may not keep enough air pressure 
for safe driving. 
Test Air Leakage Rate. With a fully-charged air 
system (typically 125 psi), turn off the engine, 
release the parking brake (push in); and time the air 
pressure drop.  The loss rate should be less than 
two psi in one minute for single vehicles and less 
than three psi in one minute for combination 
vehicles.   
With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff (120 – 140 psi), shut off the engine, chock your wheels (if 
necessary), release the parking brake (all vehicles), 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-6 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
and the tractor protection valve (combination 
vehicle); and fully apply the foot brake.  Hold the foot 
brake for one minute.  Check the air gauge to see if 
the air pressure drops more than three pounds in 
one minute (single vehicle) or four pounds in one 
minute (combination vehicle).  If the air pressure 
falls more than three psi in one minute for single 
vehicles (more than four psi for combination 
vehicles), the air loss rate is too much. Check for air 
leaks and fix before driving the vehicle. Otherwise, 
you could lose your brakes while driving. 
Test Low Pressure Warning Signal. Shut the 
engine off when you have enough air pressure so 
that the low pressure warning signal is not on. Turn 
the electrical power on and step on and off the brake 
pedal to reduce air tank pressure. The low air 
pressure warning signal must come on before the 
pressure drops to less than 55 psi in the air tank (or 
tank with the lowest air pressure, in dual air 
systems). See Figure 5.5. 
If the warning signal doesn't work, you could lose air 
pressure and you would not know it. This could 
cause sudden emergency braking in a single-circuit 
air system. In dual systems the stopping distance 
will be increased. Only limited braking can be done 
before the spring brakes come on. 
Figure 5.5 
Check That Spring Brakes Come On 
Automatically.  Continue to fan off the air pressure 
by stepping on and off the brake pedal to reduce 
tank pressure.  The tractor protection valve and 
parking brake valve should close (pop out) on a 
tractor-trailer combination vehicle and the parking 
brake valve should close (pop out) on other 
combination and single vehicle types when the air 
pressure falls to the manufacturer’s specification 
(20 – 45 psi).  This will cause the spring brakes to 
come on.   
Check Rate of Air Pressure Buildup. When the 
engine is at operating rpms, the pressure should 
build from 85 to 100 psi within 45 seconds in dual 
air systems. (If the vehicle has larger than minimum 
air tanks, the buildup time can be longer and still be 
safe. Check the manufacturer's specifications.) In 
single air systems (pre-1975), typical requirements 
are pressure build-up from 50 to 90 psi within 3 
minutes with the engine at an idle speed of 600-900 
rpms. 
If air pressure does not build up fast enough, your 
pressure may drop too low during driving, requiring 
an emergency stop. Don't drive until you get the 
problem fixed. 
Test Parking Brake. Stop the vehicle, put the 
parking brake on, and gently pull against it in a low 
gear to test that the parking brake will hold. 
Test Service Brakes. Wait for normal air pressure, 
release the parking brake, move the vehicle forward 
slowly (about five mph), and apply the brakes firmly 
using the brake pedal. Note any vehicle "pulling" to 
one side, unusual feel, or delayed stopping action. 
This test may show you problems, which you 
otherwise wouldn't know about until you needed the 
brakes on the road. 
Subsections 5.2 and 5.3 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What is a dual air brake system? 
2. What are the slack adjusters? 
3. How can you check slack adjusters? 
4. How can you test the low pressure warning 
signal? 
5. How can you check that the spring brakes come 
on automatically? 
6. What are the maximum leakage rates? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 5.2 and 5.3. 
5.4 – Using Air Brakes 
5.4.1 – Normal Stops 
Push the brake pedal down. Control the pressure so 
the vehicle comes to a smooth, safe stop. If you 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-7 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
have a manual transmission, don't push the clutch 
in until the engine rpm is down close to idle. When 
stopped, select a starting gear. 
5.4.2 – Braking with Antilock Brakes 
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a 
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. 
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose 
steering control. When your other wheels lock up, 
you may skid, jackknife, or even spin the vehicle. 
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer 
senses impending lockup, reduces the braking 
pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control. 
You may or may not be able to stop faster with ABS, 
but you should be able to steer around an obstacle 
while braking, and avoid skids caused by over 
braking. 
Having ABS on only the tractor, only the trailer, or 
even on only one axle, still gives you more control 
over the vehicle during braking. Brake normally. 
When only the tractor has ABS, you should be able 
to maintain steering control, and there is less 
chance of jackknifing. But, keep your eye on the 
trailer and let up on the brakes (if you can safely do 
so) if it begins to swing out. 
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less 
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or 
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you 
can safely do so) until you gain control. 
When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with 
ABS, you should brake as you always have. In other 
words: 
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely 
and stay in control. 
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you 
have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both. 
As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer 
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to 
stay in control. 
There is only one exception to this procedure, if you 
always drive a straight truck or combination with 
working ABS on all axles, in an emergency stop, you 
can fully apply the brakes. 
Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions. 
Drive and brake as you always have. 
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have 
regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the system 
serviced soon. 
5.4.3 – Emergency Stops 
If somebody suddenly pulls out in front of you, your 
natural response is to hit the brakes. This is a good 
response if there's enough distance to stop, and you 
use the brakes correctly. 
You should brake in a way that will keep your 
vehicle in a straight line and allow you to turn if it 
becomes necessary. You can use the "controlled 
braking" method or the "stab braking" method. 
Controlled Braking. With this method, you apply 
the brakes as hard as you can without locking the 
wheels. Keep steering wheel movements very small 
while doing this. If you need to make a larger 
steering adjustment or if the wheels lock, release 
the brakes. Re-apply the brakes as soon as you 
can. 
Stab Braking.  Apply your brakes all the way.  
Release brakes when wheels lock up.  As soon as 
the wheels start rolling, apply the brakes fully again. 
(It can take up to one second for the wheels to start 
rolling after you release the brakes. If you re-apply 
the brakes before the wheels start rolling, the 
vehicle won't straighten out.) 
5.4.4 – Stopping Distance 
Stopping distance was described in Section 2 under 
"Speed and Stopping Distance." With air brakes 
there is an added delay - “Brake Lag”.  This is the 
time required for the brakes to work after the brake 
pedal is pushed. With hydraulic brakes (used on 
cars and light/medium trucks), the brakes work 
instantly. However, with air brakes, it takes a little 
time (one half second or more) for the air to flow 
through the lines to the brakes. Thus, the total 
stopping distance for vehicles with air brake 
systems is made up of four different factors. 
Perception Distance + Reaction Distance + Brake 
Lag Distance + Braking Distance = Total Stopping 
Distance. 
The air brake lag distance at 55 mph on dry 
pavement adds about 32 feet. So at 55 mph for an 
average driver under good traction and brake 
conditions, the total stopping distance is over 450 
feet. See Figure 5.6. 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-8 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Figure 5.6 
5.4.5 – Brake Fading or Failure 
Brakes are designed so brake shoes or pads rub 
against the brake drum or disks to slow the vehicle. 
Braking creates heat, but brakes are designed to 
take a lot of heat. However, brakes can fade or fail 
from excessive heat caused by using them too 
much and not relying on the engine braking effect. 
Excessive use of the service brakes results in 
overheating and leads to brake fade. Brake fade 
results from excessive heat causing chemical 
changes in the brake lining, which reduce friction, 
and also causing expansion of the brake drums. As 
the overheated drums expand, the brake shoes and 
linings have to move farther to contact the drums, 
and the force of this contact is reduced. Continued 
overuse may increase brake fade until the vehicle 
cannot be slowed down or stopped. 
Brake fade is also affected by adjustment. To safely 
control a vehicle, every brake must do its share of 
the work. Brakes out of adjustment will stop doing 
their share before those that are in adjustment. The 
other brakes can then overheat and fade, and there 
will not be enough braking available to control the 
vehicle(s). Brakes can get out of adjustment quickly, 
especially when they are hot. Therefore, check 
brake adjustment often. 
5.4.6 – Proper Braking Technique 
Remember. The use of brakes on a long and/or 
steep downgrade is only a supplement to the 
braking effect of the engine. Once the vehicle is in 
the proper low gear, the following is the proper 
braking technique: 
Apply the brakes just hard enough to feel a definite 
slowdown. 
When your speed has been reduced to 
approximately five mph below your "safe" speed, 
release the brakes. (This application should last for 
about three seconds.) 
When your speed has increased to your "safe" 
speed, repeat steps 1 and 2. 
For example, if your "safe" speed is 40 mph, you 
would not apply the brakes until your speed reaches 
40 mph. You now apply the brakes hard enough to 
gradually reduce your speed to 35 mph and then 
release the brakes. Repeat this as often as 
necessary until you have reached the end of the 
downgrade. 
5.4.7 – Low Air Pressure 
If the low air pressure warning comes on, stop and 
safely park your vehicle as soon as possible. There 
might be an air leak in the system. Controlled 
braking is possible only while enough air remains in 
the air tanks. The spring brakes will come on when 
the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to 45 psi. 
A heavily loaded vehicle will take a long distance to 
stop because the spring brakes do not work on all 
axles. Lightly loaded vehicles or vehicles on slippery 
roads may skid out of control when the spring 
brakes come on. It is much safer to stop while there 
is enough air in the tanks to use the foot brakes. 
5.4.8 – Parking Brakes 
Any time you park, use the parking brakes, except 
as noted below. Pull the parking brake control knob 
out to apply the parking brakes, push it in to release. 
The control will be a yellow, diamond-shaped knob 
labeled "parking brakes" on newer vehicles. On 
older vehicles, it may be a round blue knob or some 
other shape (including a lever that swings from side 
to side or up and down). 
Don't use the parking brakes if the brakes are very 
hot (from just having come down a steep grade), or 
if the brakes are very wet in freezing temperatures. 
If they are used while they are very hot, they can be 
damaged by the heat. If they are used in freezing 
temperatures when the brakes are very wet, they 
can freeze so the vehicle cannot move. Use wheel 
chocks on a level surface to hold the vehicle. Let hot 
brakes cool before using the parking brakes. If the 
brakes are wet, use the brakes lightly while driving 
in a low gear to heat and dry them. 
If your vehicle does not have automatic air tank 
drains, drain your air tanks at the end of each 
working day to remove moisture and oil. Otherwise, 
the brakes could fail. 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-9 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Never leave your vehicle unattended without 
applying the parking brakes or chocking the 
wheels. Your vehicle might roll away and cause 
injury and damage. 
Subsection 5.4 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Why should you be in the proper gear before 
starting down a hill? 
What factors can cause brakes to fade or fail? 
The use of brakes on a long, steep downgrade 
is only a supplement to the braking effect of 
the engine. True or False? 
If you are away from your vehicle only a short 
time, you do not need to use the parking 
brake. True or False? 
How often should you drain air tanks? 
How should you brake when you drive a 
tractor-trailer combination with ABS? 
You still have normal brake functions if your 
ABS is not working. True or False? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 5.4. 
Section 5 – Air Brakes 
Page 5-10 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 6  
COMBINATION VEHICLES 
This Section Covers 
• Driving Combinations 
• Combination Vehicle Air Brakes 
• Antilock Brake Systems 
• Coupling and Uncoupling 
• Inspecting Combinations 
This section provides information needed to pass 
the tests for combination vehicles (tractor-trailer, 
doubles, triples, straight truck with trailer). The 
information is only to give you the minimum 
knowledge needed for driving common combination 
vehicles. You should also study Section 7 if you 
need to pass the test for doubles and triples. 
6.1 – Driving Combination Vehicles 
Safely 
Combination vehicles are usually heavier, longer, 
and require more driving skill than single 
commercial vehicles. This means that drivers of 
combination vehicles need more knowledge and 
skill than drivers of single vehicles. In this section, 
we talk about some important safety factors that 
apply specifically to combination vehicles. 
6.1.1 – Rollover Risks 
More than half of truck driver deaths in crashes are 
the result of truck rollovers. When more cargo is 
piled up in a truck, the "center of gravity" moves 
higher up from the road. The truck becomes easier 
to turn over. Fully loaded rigs are ten times more 
likely to roll over in a crash than empty rigs. 
The following two things will help you prevent 
rollover--keep the cargo as close to the ground as 
possible, and drive slowly around turns. Keeping 
cargo low is even more important in combination 
vehicles than in straight trucks. Also, keep the load 
centered on your rig. If the load is to one side so it 
makes a trailer lean, a rollover is more likely. Make 
sure your cargo is centered and spread out as much 
as possible. (Cargo distribution is covered in 
Section 3 of this manual.) 
Rollovers happen when you turn too fast. Drive 
slowly around corners, on ramps, and off ramps. 
Avoid quick lane changes, especially when fully 
loaded. 
6.1.2 – Steer Gently 
Trucks with trailers have a dangerous "crack-the
whip" effect. When you make a quick lane change, 
the crack-the-whip effect can turn the trailer over. 
There are many accidents where only the trailer has 
overturned. 
"Rearward amplification" causes the crack-the-whip 
effect. Figure 6.1 shows eight types of combination 
vehicles and the rearward amplification each has in 
a quick lane change. Rigs with the least crack-the
whip effect are shown at the top and those with the 
most, at the bottom. Rearward amplification of 2.0 
in the chart means that the rear trailer is twice as 
likely to turn over as the tractor. You can see that 
triples have a rearward amplification of 3.5. This 
means you can roll the last trailer of triples 3.5 times 
as easily as a five-axle tractor. 
Steer gently and smoothly when you are pulling 
trailers. If you make a sudden movement with your 
steering wheel, your trailer could tip over. Follow far 
enough behind other vehicles (at least 1 second for 
each 10 feet of your vehicle length, plus another 
second if going over 40 mph). Look far enough 
down the road to avoid being surprised and having 
to make a sudden lane change. At night, drive 
slowly enough to see obstacles with your headlights 
before it is too late to change lanes or stop gently. 
Slow down to a safe speed before going into a turn. 
6.1.3 – Brake Early 
Control your speed whether fully loaded or empty. 
Large combination vehicles take longer to stop 
when they are empty than when they are fully 
loaded. When lightly loaded, the very stiff 
suspension springs and strong brakes give poor 
traction and make it very easy to lock up the wheels. 
Your trailer can swing out and strike other vehicles. 
Your tractor can jackknife very quickly. You also 
must be very careful about driving "bobtail" tractors 
(tractors without semitrailers). Tests have shown 
that bobtails can be very hard to stop smoothly. It 
takes them longer to stop than a tractor-semitrailer 
loaded to maximum gross weight. 
In any combination rig, allow lots of following 
distance and look far ahead, so you can brake early. 
Don't be caught by surprise and have to make a 
"panic" stop. 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-1 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Figure 6.1 
6.1.4 – Railroad-highway Crossings 
Railroad-highway crossings can also cause 
problems, particularly when pulling trailers with low 
underneath clearance. 
These trailers can get stuck on raised crossings: 
Low slung units (lowboy, car carrier, moving van, 
possum-belly livestock trailer). 
Single-axle tractor pulling a long trailer with its 
landing gear set to accommodate a tandem-axle 
tractor. 
If for any reason you get stuck on the tracks, get out 
of the vehicle and away from the tracks. Check 
signposts or signal housing at the crossing for 
emergency notification information. Call 911 or 
other emergency number. Give the location of the 
crossing using all identifiable landmarks, especially 
the DOT number, if posted. 
6.1.5 – Prevent Trailer Skids 
When the wheels of a trailer lock up, the trailer will 
tend to swing around. This is more likely to happen 
when the trailer is empty or lightly loaded. This type 
of jackknife is often called a "trailer jackknife." See 
Figure 6.2. 
The procedure for stopping a trailer skid is: 
Recognize the Skid. The earliest and best way to 
recognize that the trailer has started to skid is by 
seeing it in your mirrors. Any time you apply the 
brakes hard, check the mirrors to make sure the 
trailer is staying where it should be. Once the trailer 
swings out of your lane, it's very difficult to prevent 
a jackknife. 
* (From R.D. Ervin, R.L. Nisconger, C.C. MacAdam, 
and P.S. Fancher, “Influence of size and weight 
variables on the stability and control properties of 
heavy trucks, “University of Michigan Transportation 
Research Institute, 1983). 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-2 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Figure 6.2 
Stop Using the Brake. Release the brakes to get 
traction back. Do not use the trailer hand brake (if 
you have one) to "straighten out the rig." This is the 
wrong thing to do since the brakes on the trailer 
wheels caused the skid in the first place. Once the 
trailer wheels grip the road again, the trailer will start 
to follow the tractor and straighten out. 
6.1.6 – Turn Wide 
When a vehicle goes around a corner, the rear 
wheels follow a different path than the front wheels. 
This is called off-tracking or "cheating." Figure 6.3 
shows how off-tracking causes the path followed by 
a tractor to be wider than the rig itself. Longer 
vehicles will off-track more. The rear wheels of the 
powered unit (truck or tractor) will off-track some, 
and the rear wheels of the trailer will off-track even 
more. If there is more than one trailer, the rear 
wheels of the last trailer will off-track the most. Steer 
the front end wide enough around a corner so the 
rear end does not run over the curb, pedestrians, 
etc. However, keep the rear of your vehicle close to 
the curb. This will stop other drivers from passing 
you on the right. If you cannot complete your turn 
without entering another traffic lane, turn wide as 
you complete the turn. This is better than swinging 
wide to the left before starting the turn because it 
will keep other drivers from passing you on the right. 
See Figure 6.4. 
Figure 6.3 
Figure 6.4 
6.1.7 – Backing with a Trailer. 
Backing with a Trailer. When backing a car, 
straight truck, or bus, you turn the top of the steering 
wheel in the direction you want to go. When backing 
a trailer, you turn the steering wheel in the opposite 
direction. Once the trailer starts to turn, you must 
turn the wheel the other way to follow the trailer. 
Whenever you back up with a trailer, try to position 
your vehicle so you can back in a straight line. If you 
must back on a curved path, back to the driver's side 
so you can see. See Figure 6.5. 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-3 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Figure 6.5 
Look at Your Path. Look at your line of travel 
before you begin. Get out and walk around the 
vehicle. Check your clearance to the sides and 
overhead, in and near the path your vehicle. 
Use Mirrors on Both Sides. Check the outside 
mirrors on both sides frequently. Get out of the 
vehicle and re-inspect your path if you are unsure. 
Back Slowly. This will let you make corrections 
before you get too far off course. 
Correct Drift Immediately. As soon as you see the 
trailer getting off the proper path, correct it by turning 
the top of the steering wheel in the direction of the 
drift. 
Pull Forward. When backing a trailer, make pull
ups to re-position your vehicle as needed.
Subsection 6.1 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
What two things are important to prevent 
rollover? 
When you turn suddenly while pulling 
doubles, which trailer is most likely to turn 
over? 
Why should you not use the trailer hand 
brake to straighten out a jackknifing trailer? 
What is off-tracking? 
When you back a trailer, you should 
position your vehicle so you can back in a 
curved path to the driver’s side. True or 
False? 
What type of trailers can get stuck on 
railroad-highway crossings? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 6.1. 
6.2 – Combination Vehicle Air Brakes 
You should study Section 5: Air Brakes before 
reading this. In combination vehicles the braking 
system has parts to control the trailer brakes, in 
addition to the parts described in Section 5. These 
parts are described below. 
6.2.1 – Trailer Hand Valve 
The trailer hand valve (also called the trolley valve 
or Johnson bar) works the trailer brakes. The trailer 
hand valve should be used only to test the trailer 
brakes. Do not use it in driving because of the 
danger of making the trailer skid. The foot brake 
sends air to all of the brakes on the vehicle 
(including the trailer(s)). There is much less danger 
of causing a skid or jackknife when using just the 
foot brake. 
Never use the hand valve for parking because all 
the air might leak out unlocking the brakes (in 
trailers that don't have spring brakes). Always use 
the parking brakes when parking. If the trailer does 
not have spring brakes, use wheel chocks to keep 
the trailer from moving. 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-4 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
6.2.2 – Tractor Protection Valve 
The tractor protection valve keeps air in the tractor 
or truck brake system should the trailer break away 
or develop a bad leak. The tractor protection valve 
is controlled by the "trailer air supply" control valve 
in the cab. The control valve allows you to open and 
shut the tractor protection valve. The tractor 
protection valve will close automatically if air 
pressure is low (in the range of 20 to 45 psi). When 
the tractor protection valve closes, it stops any air 
from going out of the tractor. It also lets the air out 
of the trailer emergency line. This causes the trailer 
emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss of 
control. (Emergency brakes are covered later.) 
6.2.3 – Trailer Air Supply Control 
The trailer air supply control on newer vehicles is a 
red eight-sided knob, which you use to control the 
tractor protection valve. You push it in to supply the 
trailer with air, and pull it out to shut the air off and 
put on the trailer emergency brakes. The valve will 
pop out (thus closing the tractor protection valve) 
when the air pressure drops into the range of 20 to 
45 psi. Tractor protection valve controls or 
"emergency" valves on older vehicles may not 
operate automatically. There may be a lever rather 
than a knob. The "normal" position is used for 
pulling a trailer. The "emergency" position is used to 
shut the air off and put on the trailer emergency 
brakes. 
6.2.4 – Trailer Air-lines 
Every combination vehicle has two air-lines, the 
service line and the emergency line. They run 
between each vehicle (tractor to trailer, trailer to 
dolly, dolly to second trailer, etc.) 
Service Air-line. The service line (also called the 
control line or signal line) carries air, which is 
controlled by the foot brake or the trailer hand brake. 
Depending on how hard you press the foot brake or 
hand valve, the pressure in the service line will 
similarly change. The service line is connected to 
relay valves. These valves allow the trailer brakes 
to be applied more quickly than would otherwise be 
possible. 
Emergency Air-line. The emergency line (also 
called the supply line) has two purposes. First, it 
supplies air to the trailer air tanks. Second, the 
emergency line controls the emergency brakes on 
combination vehicles. Loss of air pressure in the 
emergency line causes the trailer emergency 
brakes to come on. The pressure loss could be 
caused by a trailer breaking loose, thus tearing 
apart the emergency air hose. Or it could be caused 
by a hose, metal tubing, or other part breaking, 
letting the air out. When the emergency line loses 
pressure, it also causes the tractor protection valve 
to close (the air supply knob will pop out). 
Emergency lines are often coded with the color red 
(red hose, red couplers, or other parts) to keep from 
getting them mixed up with the blue service line. 
6.2.5 – Hose Couplers (Glad Hands) 
Glad hands are coupling devices used to connect 
the service and emergency air-lines from the truck 
or tractor to the trailer. The couplers have a rubber 
seal, which prevents air from escaping. Clean the 
couplers and rubber seals before a connection is 
made. When connecting the glad hands, press the 
two seals together with the couplers at a 90 degree 
angle to each other. A turn of the glad hand attached 
to the hose will join and lock the couplers. 
When coupling, make sure to couple the proper glad 
hands together. To help avoid mistakes, colors are 
sometimes used. Blue is used for the service lines 
and red for the emergency (supply) lines. 
Sometimes, metal tags are attached to the lines with 
the words "service" and "emergency" stamped on 
them. See Figure 6.6 
Figure 6.6 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-5 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
If you do cross the air-lines, supply air will be sent 
to the service line instead of going to charge the 
trailer air tanks. Air will not be available to release 
the trailer spring brakes (parking brakes). If the 
spring brakes don't release when you push the 
trailer air supply control, check the air-line 
connections. 
Older trailers do not have spring brakes. If the air 
supply in the trailer air tank has leaked away there 
will be no emergency brakes, and the trailer wheels 
will turn freely. If you crossed the air-lines, you could 
drive away but you wouldn't have trailer brakes. This 
would be very dangerous. Always test the trailer 
brakes before driving with the hand valve or by 
pulling the air supply (tractor protection valve) 
control. Pull gently against them in a low gear to 
make sure the brakes work. 
Some vehicles have "dead end" or dummy couplers 
to which the hoses may be attached when they are 
not in use. This will prevent water and dirt from 
getting into the coupler and the air-lines. Use the 
dummy couplers when the air-lines are not 
connected to a trailer. If there are no dummy 
couplers, the glad hands can sometimes be locked 
together (depending on the couplings). It is very 
important to keep the air supply clean. 
6.2.6 – Trailer Air Tanks 
Each trailer and converter dolly has one or more air 
tanks. They are filled by the emergency (supply) line 
from the tractor. They provide the air pressure used 
to operate trailer brakes. Air pressure is sent from 
the air tanks to the brakes by relay valves.  
The pressure in the service line tells how much 
pressure the relay valves should send to the trailer 
brakes. The pressure in the service line is controlled 
by the brake pedal (and the trailer hand brake). 
It is important that you don't let water and oil build 
up in the air tanks. If you do, the brakes may not 
work correctly. Each tank has a drain valve on it and 
you should drain each tank every day. If your tanks 
have automatic drains, they will keep most moisture 
out. But you should still open the drains to make 
sure. 
6.2.7 – Shut-off Valves 
Shut-off valves (also called cut-out cocks) are used 
in the service and supply air-lines at the back of 
trailers used to tow other trailers. These valves 
permit closing the air-lines off when another trailer 
is not being towed. You must check that all shut-off 
valves are in the open position except the ones at 
the back of the last trailer, which must be closed. 
6.2.8 – Trailer Service, Parking and Emergency 
Brakes 
Newer trailers have spring brakes just like trucks 
and truck tractors. However, converter dollies and 
trailers built before 1975 are not required to have 
spring brakes. Those that do not have spring brakes 
have emergency brakes, which work from the air 
stored in the trailer air tank. The emergency brakes 
come on whenever air pressure in the emergency 
line is lost. These trailers have no parking brake. 
The emergency brakes come on whenever the air 
supply knob is pulled out or the trailer is 
disconnected. A major leak in the emergency line 
will cause the tractor protection valve to close and 
the trailer emergency brakes to come on. But the 
brakes will hold only as long as there is air pressure 
in the trailer air tank. Eventually, the air will leak 
away and then there will be no brakes. Therefore, it 
is very important for safety that you use wheel 
chocks when you park trailers without spring 
brakes.  
You may not notice a major leak in the service line 
until you try to put the brakes on. Then, the air loss 
from the leak will lower the air tank pressure quickly. 
If it goes low enough, the trailer emergency brakes 
will come on. 
Subsection 6.2 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Why should you not use the trailer hand 
valve while driving? 
Describe what the trailer air supply control 
does. 
Describe what the service line is for. 
What is the emergency air-line for? 
Why should you use chocks when parking 
a trailer without spring brakes? 
Where are shut-off valves? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 6.2. 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-6 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
6.3 – Antilock Brake Systems 
6.3.1 – Trailers Required to Have ABS 
All trailers and converter dollies built on or after 
March 1, 1998, are required to have ABS. However, 
many trailers and converter dollies built before this 
date have been voluntarily equipped with ABS. 
Trailers will have yellow ABS malfunction lamps on 
the left side, either on the front or rear corner. See 
Figure 6.7. Dollies manufactured on or after March 
1, 1998, are required to have a lamp on the left side. 
In the case of vehicles manufactured before the 
required date, it may be difficult to tell if the unit is 
equipped with ABS. Look under the vehicle for the 
ECU and wheel speed sensor wires coming from 
the back of the brakes. 
Figure 6.7 
6.3.2 – Braking with ABS 
ABS is an addition to your normal brakes. It does 
not decrease or increase your normal braking 
capability. ABS only activates when wheels are 
about to lock up. 
ABS does not necessarily shorten your stopping 
distance, but it does help you keep the vehicle under 
control during hard braking. 
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up. The computer 
senses impending lockup, reduces the braking 
pressure to a safe level, and you maintain control. 
Having ABS on only the trailer, or even on only one 
axle, still gives you more control over the vehicle 
during braking. 
When only the trailer has ABS, the trailer is less 
likely to swing out, but if you lose steering control or 
start a tractor jackknife, let up on the brakes (if you 
can safely do so) until you gain control. 
When you drive a tractor-trailer combination with 
ABS, you should brake as you always have. In other 
words: 
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely 
and stay in control. 
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you 
have ABS on the tractor, the trailer, or both. 
As you slow down, monitor your tractor and trailer 
and back off the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to 
stay in control. 
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have 
regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the system 
serviced soon. 
ABS won’t allow you to drive faster, follow more 
closely, or drive less carefully. 
6.4 – Coupling and Uncoupling 
Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is 
basic to safe operation of combination vehicles. 
Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very 
dangerous. General coupling and uncoupling steps 
are listed below. There are differences between 
different rigs, so learn the details of coupling and 
uncoupling the truck(s) you will operate. 
6.4.1 – Coupling Tractor-Semitrailers 
Step 1. Inspect Fifth Wheel 
Check for damaged/missing parts. 
Check to see that mounting to tractor is secure, no 
cracks in frame, etc. 
Be sure that the fifth wheel plate is greased as 
required. Failure to keep the fifth wheel plate 
lubricated could cause steering problems because 
of friction between the tractor and trailer. 
Check if fifth wheel is in proper position for 
coupling: 
Wheel tilted down toward rear of tractor. 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-7 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Jaws open. 
Safety unlocking handle in the automatic lock 
position. 
If you have a sliding fifth wheel, make sure it is 
locked. 
Make sure the trailer kingpin is not bent or broken. 
Step 2. Inspect Area and Chock Wheels 
Make sure area around the vehicle is clear. 
Be sure trailer wheels are chocked or spring 
brakes are on. 
Check that cargo (if any) is secured against 
movement due to tractor being coupled to the 
trailer. 
Step 3. Position Tractor 
Put the tractor directly in front of the trailer. (Never 
back under the trailer at an angle because you 
might push the trailer sideways and break the 
landing gear.) 
Check position, using outside mirrors, by looking 
down both sides of the trailer. 
Step 4. Back Slowly 
Back until fifth wheel just touches the trailer. 
Don't hit the trailer. 
Step 5. Secure Tractor 
Put on the parking brake. 
Put transmission in neutral. 
Step 6. Check Trailer Height 
The trailer should be low enough that it is raised 
slightly by the tractor when the tractor is backed 
under it. Raise or lower the trailer as needed. (If 
the trailer is too low, the tractor may strike and 
damage the trailer nose; if the trailer is too high, it 
may not couple correctly.) 
Check that the kingpin and fifth wheel are aligned. 
Step 7. Connect Air-lines to Trailer 
Check glad hand seals and connect tractor 
emergency air-line to trailer emergency glad hand. 
Check glad hand seals and connect tractor service 
air-line to trailer service glad hand. 
Make sure air-lines are safely supported where 
they won't be crushed or caught while tractor is 
backing under the trailer. 
Step 8. Supply Air to Trailer 
From cab, push in "air supply" knob or move 
tractor protection valve control from the 
"emergency" to the "normal" position to supply air 
to the trailer brake system. 
Wait until the air pressure is normal. 
Check brake system for crossed air-lines. 
Shut engine off so you can hear the brakes. 
Apply and release trailer brakes and listen for sound 
of trailer brakes being applied and released. You 
should hear the brakes move when applied and air 
escape when the brakes are released. 
Check air brake system pressure gauge for signs of 
major air loss. 
When you are sure trailer brakes are working, start 
engine. 
Make sure air pressure is up to normal. 
Step 9. Lock Trailer Brakes 
Pull out the "air supply" knob or move the tractor 
protection valve control from "normal" to 
"emergency." 
Step 10. Back Under Trailer 
Use lowest reverse gear. 
Back tractor slowly under trailer to avoid hitting the 
kingpin too hard. 
Stop when the kingpin is locked into the fifth wheel. 
Step 11. Check Connection for Security 
Raise trailer landing gear slightly off ground. 
Pull tractor gently forward while the trailer brakes 
are still locked to check that the trailer is locked 
onto the tractor. 
Step 12. Secure Vehicle 
Put transmission in neutral. 
Put parking brakes on. 
Shut off engine and take key with you so someone 
else won't move truck while you are under it. 
Step 13. Inspect Coupling 
Use a flashlight, if necessary. 
Make sure there is no space between upper and 
lower fifth wheel. If there is space, something is 
wrong (kingpin may be on top of the closed fifth 
wheel jaws, and trailer would come loose very 
easily). 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-8 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Go under trailer and look into the back of the fifth 
wheel. Make sure the fifth wheel jaws have closed 
around the shank of the kingpin. 
Check that the locking lever is in the "lock" 
position. 
Check that the safety latch is in position over 
locking lever. (On some fifth wheels the catch must 
be put in place by hand.) 
If the coupling isn't right, don't drive the coupled 
unit; get it fixed. 
Step 14. Connect the Electrical Cord and Check 
Air-lines 
Plug the electrical cord into the trailer and fasten 
the safety catch. 
Check both air-lines and electrical line for signs of 
damage. 
Make sure air and electrical lines will not hit any 
moving parts of vehicle. 
Step 15. Raise Front Trailer Supports (Landing 
Gear) 
Use low gear range (if so equipped) to begin 
raising the landing gear. Once free of weight, 
switch to the high gear range. 
Raise the landing gear all the way up. (Never drive 
with landing gear only part way up as it may catch 
on railroad tracks or other things.) 
After raising landing gear, secure the crank handle 
safely. 
When full weight of trailer is resting on tractor: 
Check for enough clearance between rear of tractor 
frame and landing gear. (When tractor turns 
sharply, it must not hit landing gear.) 
Check that there is enough clearance between the 
top of the tractor tires and the nose of the trailer. 
Step 16. Remove Trailer Wheel Chocks 
Remove and store wheel chocks in a safe place. 
6.4.2 – Uncoupling Tractor-Semitrailers 
The following steps will help you to uncouple safely. 
Step 1. Position Rig 
Make sure surface of parking area can support 
weight of trailer. 
Have tractor lined up with the trailer. (Pulling out at 
an angle can damage landing gear.) 
Step 2. Ease Pressure on Locking Jaws 
Shut off trailer air supply to lock trailer brakes. 
Ease pressure on fifth wheel locking jaws by 
backing up gently. (This will help you release the 
fifth wheel locking lever.) 
Put parking brakes on while tractor is pushing 
against the kingpin. (This will hold rig with pressure 
off the locking jaws.) 
Step 3. Chock Trailer Wheels 
Chock the trailer wheels if the trailer doesn't have 
spring brakes or if you're not sure. (The air could 
leak out of the trailer air tank, releasing its 
emergency brakes. Without chocks, the trailer could 
move.) 
Step 4. Lower the Landing Gear 
If trailer is empty, lower the landing gear until it 
makes firm contact with the ground. 
If trailer is loaded, after the landing gear makes firm 
contact with the ground, turn crank in low gear a few 
extra turns. This will lift some weight off the tractor. 
(Do not lift trailer off the fifth wheel.) This will: 
Make it easier to unlatch fifth wheel. 
Make it easier to couple next time. 
Step 5. Disconnect Air-lines and Electrical Cable 
Disconnect air-lines from trailer. Connect air-line 
glad hands to dummy couplers at back of cab or 
couple them together. 
Hang electrical cable with plug down to prevent 
moisture from entering it. 
Make sure lines are supported so they won't be 
damaged while driving the tractor. 
Step 6. Unlock Fifth Wheel  
Raise the release handle lock. 
Pull the release handle to "open" position. 
Keep legs and feet clear of the rear tractor wheels 
to avoid serious injury in case the vehicle moves. 
Step 7. Pull Tractor Partially Clear of Trailer 
Pull tractor forward until fifth wheel comes out from 
under the trailer. 
Stop with tractor frame under trailer (prevents trailer 
from falling to ground if landing gear should collapse 
or sink). 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-9 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Step 8. Secure Tractor 
Apply parking brake. 
Place transmission in neutral. 
Step 9. Inspect Trailer Supports 
Make sure ground is supporting trailer. 
Make sure landing gear is not damaged. 
Step 10. Pull Tractor Clear of Trailer 
Release parking brakes. 
Check the area and drive tractor forward until it 
clears.  
Subsections 6.3 and 6.4 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What might happen if the trailer is too high when 
you try to couple? 
2. After coupling, how much space should be 
between the upper and lower fifth wheel? 
3. You should look into the back of the fifth wheel 
to see if it is locked onto the kingpin. True or 
False? 
4. To drive you need to raise the landing gear only 
until it just lifts off the pavement. True or False? 
5. How do you know if your trailer is equipped with 
antilock brakes? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 6.3 and 6.4. 
6.4.3 Coupling a  Pintle Hook 
Step 1. Inspect Pintle Hook 
Before operating, check for worn, damaged, or 
missing parts, and make sure mount is secure. 
If the pintle hook is not secured to the mounting 
surface, the pintle hook could separate from the 
vehicle which, if not avoided, could result in death 
or serious injury. 
Step 2. Unlock Lock Pin and Open Latch 
Unlock and remove the tethered lock pin, if 
applicable (Figure 16). 
Lift the lock handle away from the vehicle until the 
lock clears the lock seat on the hook body.  
Open the latch by rotating the latch assembly up 
toward the vehicle until the latch is in its most 
upright position, then release the lock handle. 
(Figure 17 and 18) 
.  
Step 3. Lower Drawbar into Place 
Position the drawbar eye over the horn of the pintle 
hook and lower it into place. 
Step 4. Lock Pintle Hook 
Push the latch closed. When correctly locked, the 
lock handle will rotate and move up until it is flush 
with the top of the latch (Figure 19). 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-10 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Insert the tethered lock pin through the latch and 
lock holes, and close the tethered wire lock pin, if 
applicable (Figure 16). 
Failure to correctly lock the latch can result in 
separation of the trailer and vehicle which, if not 
avoided, could result in death or serious injury. 
6.4.4 - Uncoupling a Pintle Hook  
Step 1. Park on Level Surface 
Park the trailer on a firm level surface and block 
trailer tires. 
Step 2. Disconnect Electrical Connector, 
Breakaway Brake Switch and Safety Chains 
Disconnect electrical connector. 
Disconnect breakaway brake switch lanyard. 
Disconnect safety chains from tow vehicle. 
Step 3. Unlock the Coupler 
Unlock the coupler and open it. 
Step 4. Check Ground Surface for Correct 
Support 
Before extending jack, make certain the ground 
surface below the jack pad will support the tongue 
load. 
Step 5. Rotate Jack Handle 
Rotate jack handle to extend the jack and transfer 
the weight of the trailer tongue to the jack. 
Step 6. Raise Trailer Coupler 
Raise the trailer coupler above the tow vehicle 
hitch. 
Step 7. Drive Forward 
Drive tow vehicle forward. 
6.4.5 - Coupling a Drawbar 
Step 1. Remove Safety Lock screw and Rotate 
Safety Cover Bar 
Remove safety lock screw (2), recover and keep 
the relative self-locking nut (12) aside then also 
loosen safety lock screw (2a) and turn out the 
adjustment screw (3) by at least five turns. 
Rotate the safety cover bar (4) outwards so that it 
is completely open. 
Step 2. Reverse Truck  
Reverse truck very slowly until the ball cup 
drawbar eye (6) is in position exactly above the 
drawbar coupling ball (5). 
Step 3. Lower the Drawbeam 
Lower the drawbeam until the ball cup drawbar eye 
(6) lies completely covering the drawbar coupling 
ball (5). 
Step 4. Rotate the Safety Cover Bar 
Rotate the safety cover bar back inwards (4) and fit 
in safety lock screw (2) together with its self
locking nut. 
Tighten in both the lock screws (2, 2a) together 
with their relative self-locking nuts (12, 12a) at a 
350 to 400 Nm torque wrench setting. 
Step 5. Adjust the Adjustment Screw 
Adjust the adjustment screw (3) until a 0.3 - 0.5 
mm vertical clearance between the guard disk (13) 
and the ball cup (6) is reached. Lock setting with 
counter nut (11). 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-11 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
In the event that the safety cover bar (4) will not 
perfectly lodge into its seating appropriately, travel 
is strictly forbidden.  
Step 6. Protect Coupling Ball and Anchor Edge 
onto Ball 
Protect the part that is still visible of the coupling 
ball (5) with the rubber dust proof bellows 
protection cover (7). Accurately anchor the edge 
directly onto the ball itself. 
Step 7. Lubricate the Drawbar Eye 
Lubricate the inside of the drawbar eye ball cup (6) 
directly through the grease nipple (18). 
6.4.6 - Uncoupling a Drawbar 
Step 1. Turn Trailer Brake On 
Make sure that the trailer brake is on. 
Step 2. Remove Cover and Loosen Screws 
Remove the rubber dust proof bellows protection 
cover (7). 
Loosen the adjustment screw (3) and the counter 
nut (11). 
Loosen safety lock screw (2a) and remove safety 
lock screw (2) together with its self-locking nut 
(12). 
Step 3. Rotate Safety Cover Bar and Lift Trailer 
Drawbeam 
Rotate the safety cover bar (4) outwards so that it 
is completely open. 
Lift the trailer drawbeam until the drawbar coupling 
ball (5) is fully visible, then travel forward with the 
trailer very slowly. 
Rotate the safety cover bar inwards (4) until it 
lodges back in its housing. 
Step 4. Lock Safety Screw and Tighten Self
Locking Nut 
Fit in safety lock screw (2) and tighten in self
locking nut (12). 
6.4.7 - Coupling a Gooseneck Hitch 
If you are hooking up a Gooseneck or a fifth wheel 
hitch, the procedure is a little different from a 
receiver and ball, but it is not more difficult.  
Step 1. Open the Latch and Lubricate the 
Gooseneck Ball 
Open the clamp latch on the Gooseneck coupler.  
Make sure that the Gooseneck ball is properly 
lubricated.  
Step 2. Position Coupler and Latch the Clamp 
Position the trailer's coupler directly over the ball 
and lower the Gooseneck trailer into position and 
latch the clamp.  
Step 3. Attach Safety Chains 
Attach your safety chains. Remember that all 
trailers are required by law to have safety chains. 
Step 4. Connect Trailer Light Wiring  
Connect your trailer light wiring to your vehicle's 
connector. 
Check all of your lights, including your brake lights.  
Step 5. Lower and Stow the Trailer Jacks 
Completely lower and stow the trailer jacks, 
allowing the weight to settle onto the tow vehicle. 
6.4.8 Uncoupling a Gooseneck Hitch 
Step 1. Remove Safety Pin and Clip 
Simply remove safety pin and clip.  
Step 2. Rotate Handle and Raise Trailer Off Ball 
Rotate handle to this position (Fig. B) and raise 
trailer off ball. Coupler will return to load position 
automatically.  
Step 3. Install Safety Pin and Clip 
Install safety pin and clip. (Fig. B) 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-12 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
6.5 – Inspecting a Combination Vehicle 
Use the seven-step inspection procedure described 
in Section 2 to inspect your combination vehicle. 
There are more things to inspect on a combination 
vehicle than on a single vehicle. (For example, tires, 
wheels, lights, reflectors, etc.) However, there are 
also some new things to check. These are 
discussed below. 
6.5.1 – Additional Things to Check during a 
Walk-around Inspection 
Do these checks in addition to those already listed 
in Section 2. 
Coupling System Areas 
Check fifth wheel (lower). 
Securely mounted to frame. 
No missing or damaged parts. 
Enough grease. 
No visible space between upper and lower fifth 
wheel. 
Locking jaws around the shank, not the head of 
kingpin. See Figure 6.8. 
Release arm properly seated and safety 
latch/lock engaged. 
Figure 6.8 
Check fifth wheel (upper). 
Glide plate securely mounted to trailer frame. 
Kingpin not damaged. 
Air and electric lines to trailer. 
Electrical cord firmly plugged in and secured. 
Air-lines properly connected to glad hands, no air 
leaks, properly secured with enough slack for turns. 
All lines free from damage. 
Sliding fifth wheel. 
Slide not damaged or parts missing. 
Properly greased. 
All locking pins present and locked in place. 
If air powered--no air leaks. 
Check that fifth wheel is not so far forward that 
tractor frame will hit landing gear, or the cab hit the 
trailer, during turns. 
Landing Gear 
Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent or 
otherwise damaged. 
Crank handle in place and secured. 
If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks. 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-13 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
6.5.2 – Combination Vehicle Brake Check 
Do these checks in addition to Section 5.3: 
Inspecting Air Brake Systems. 
The following section explains how to check air 
brakes on combination vehicles. Check the brakes 
on a double or triple trailer as you would any 
combination vehicle. 
Check That Air Flows to All Trailers. Use the 
tractor parking brake and/or chock the wheels to 
hold the vehicle. Wait for air pressure to reach 
normal, then push in the red "trailer air supply" knob. 
This will supply air to the emergency (supply) lines. 
Use the trailer handbrake to provide air to the 
service line. Go to the rear of the rig. Open the 
emergency line shut-off valve at the rear of the last 
trailer. You should hear air escaping, showing the 
entire system is charged. Close the emergency line 
valve. Open the service line valve to check that 
service pressure goes through all the trailers (this 
test assumes that the trailer handbrake or the 
service brake pedal is on), and then close the valve. 
If you do NOT hear air escaping from both lines, 
check that the shut-off valves on the trailer(s) and 
dolly(ies) are in the OPEN position. You MUST have 
air all the way to the back for all the brakes to work. 
Test Tractor Protection Valve. Charge the trailer 
Air-brake system. (That is, build up normal air
pressure and push the "air supply" knob in.) Shut 
the engine off. Step on and off the brake pedal 
several times to reduce the air pressure in the tanks. 
The trailer air supply control (also called the tractor 
protection valve control) should pop out (or go from 
"normal" to "emergency" position) when the air 
pressure falls into the pressure range specified by 
the manufacturer. (Usually within the range of 20 to 
45 psi.) 
If the tractor protection valve doesn't work right, an 
air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the air 
from the tractor. This would cause the emergency 
brakes to come on, with possible loss of control. 
Test Trailer Emergency Brakes. Charge the trailer 
air brake system and check that the trailer rolls 
freely. Then stop and pull out the trailer air supply 
control (also called tractor protection valve control 
or trailer emergency valve), or place it in the 
"emergency" position. Pull gently on the trailer with 
the tractor to check that the trailer emergency 
brakes are on. 
Test Trailer Service Brakes. Check for normal air 
pressure, release the parking brakes, move the 
vehicle forward slowly, and apply trailer brakes with 
the hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped. You 
should feel the brakes come on. This tells you the 
trailer brakes are connected and working. (The 
trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve 
but controlled in normal operation with the foot 
pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all 
wheels.) 
Subsection 6.5 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. Which shut-off valves should be open and 
which closed? 
2. How can you test that air flows to all trailers? 
3. How can you test the tractor protection valve? 
4. How can you test the trailer emergency brakes? 
5. How can you test the trailer service brakes? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer all of them, re-read subsection 6.5. 
Section 6 - Combination Vehicles 
Page 6-14 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 7  
DOUBLES AND TRIPLES 
This Section Covers 
• Pulling Double/Triple Trailers 
• Coupling and Uncoupling 
• Inspecting Doubles and Triples 
• Checking Air Brakes 
This section has information you need to pass the 
CDL knowledge test for driving safely with double 
and triple trailers. It tells about how important it is to 
be very careful when driving with more than one 
trailer, how to couple and uncouple correctly, and 
about inspecting doubles and triples carefully. (You 
should also study Sections 2, 5, and 6.) 
7.1 – Pulling Double/Triple Trailers 
Take special care when pulling two and three 
trailers. There are more things that can go wrong, 
and doubles/triples are less stable than other 
commercial vehicles. Some areas of concern are 
discussed below. 
7.1.1 – Prevent Trailer from Rolling Over 
To prevent trailers from rolling over, you must steer 
gently and go slowly around corners, on ramps, off 
ramps, and curves. A safe speed on a curve for a 
straight truck or a single trailer combination vehicle 
may be too fast for a set of doubles or triples. 
7.1.2 – Beware of the Crack-the-whip Effect 
Doubles and triples are more likely to turn over than 
other combination vehicles because of the "crack
the-whip" effect. You must steer gently when pulling 
trailers. The last trailer in a combination is most 
likely to turn over. If you don't understand the crack
the-whip effect, study subsection 6.1.2 of this 
manual. 
7.1.3 – Inspect Completely 
There are more critical parts to check when you 
have two or three trailers. Check them all. Follow 
the procedures described later in this section. 
7.1.4 – Look Far Ahead 
Doubles and triples must be driven very smoothly to 
avoid rollover or jackknife. Therefore, look far ahead 
so you can slow down or change lanes gradually 
when necessary. 
7.1.5 – Manage Space 
Doubles and triples take up more space than other 
commercial vehicles. They are not only longer, but 
also need more space because they can't be turned 
or stopped suddenly. Allow more following distance. 
Make sure you have large enough gaps before 
entering or crossing traffic. Be certain you are clear 
at the sides before changing lanes. 
7.1.6 – Adverse Conditions 
Be more careful in adverse conditions. In bad 
weather, slippery conditions, and mountain driving, 
you must be especially careful if you drive double 
and triple bottoms. You will have greater length and 
more dead axles to pull with your drive axles than 
other drivers. There is more chance for skids and 
loss of traction. 
7.1.7 – Parking the Vehicle 
Make sure you do not get in a spot you cannot pull 
straight through. You need to be aware of how 
parking lots are arranged in order to avoid a long 
and difficult escape. 
7.1.8 – Antilock Braking Systems on Converter 
Dollies 
Converter dollies built on or after March 1, 1998, are 
required to have antilock brakes. These dollies will 
have a yellow lamp on the left side of the dolly. 
7.2 – Coupling and Uncoupling 
Knowing how to couple and uncouple correctly is 
basic to safe operation of doubles and triples. 
Wrong coupling and uncoupling can be very 
dangerous. Coupling and uncoupling steps for 
doubles and triples are listed below. 
7.2.1 – Coupling Twin Trailers 
Secure Second (Rear) Trailer 
If the second trailer doesn't have spring brakes, 
drive the tractor close to the trailer, connect the 
emergency line, charge the trailer air tank, and 
disconnect the emergency line. This will set the 
trailer emergency brakes (if the slack adjusters are 
correctly adjusted). Chock the wheels if you have 
any doubt about the brakes. 
For the safest handling on the road, the more 
heavily loaded semitrailer should be in first position 
behind the tractor. The lighter trailer should be in the 
rear. 
Section 7 - Doubles and Triples 
Page 7-1 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
A converter gear on a dolly is a coupling device of 
one or two axles and a fifth wheel by which a 
semitrailer can be coupled to the rear of a tractor
trailer combination forming a double bottom rig. See 
Figure 7.1. 
Figure 7.1 
Position Converter Dolly in Front of Second 
(Rear) Trailer 
Release dolly brakes by opening the air tank 
petcock. (Or, if the dolly has spring brakes, use the 
dolly parking brake control.) 
If the distance is not too great, wheel the dolly into 
position by hand so it is in line with the kingpin. 
Or, use the tractor and first semitrailer to pick up the 
converter dolly: 
Position combination as close as possible to 
converter dolly. 
Move dolly to rear of first semitrailer and couple it 
to the trailer. 
Lock pintle hook. 
Secure dolly support in raised position. 
Pull dolly into position as close as possible to nose 
of the second semitrailer. 
Lower dolly support. 
Unhook dolly from first trailer. 
Wheel dolly into position in front of second trailer in 
line with the kingpin. 
Connect Converter Dolly to Front Trailer 
Back first semitrailer into position in front of dolly 
tongue. 
Hook dolly to front trailer. 
Lock pintle hook. 
Secure converter gear support in raised position. 
Connect Converter Dolly to Rear Trailer 
Make sure trailer brakes are locked and/or wheels 
chocked. 
Make sure trailer height is correct. (It must be 
slightly lower than the center of the fifth wheel, so 
trailer is raised slightly when dolly is pushed 
under.) 
Back converter dolly under rear trailer. 
Raise landing gear slightly off ground to prevent 
damage if trailer moves. 
Test coupling by pulling against pin of the second 
semitrailer. 
Make visual check of coupling. (No space between 
upper and lower fifth wheel. Locking jaws closed 
on kingpin.) 
Connect safety chains, air hoses, and light cords. 
Close converter dolly air tank petcock and shut-off 
valves at rear of second trailer (service and 
emergency shut-offs). 
Open shut-off valves at rear of first trailer (and on 
dolly if so equipped). 
Raise landing gear completely. 
Charge trailer brakes (push "air supply" knob in), 
and check for air at rear of second trailer by 
opening the emergency line shut-off. If air pressure 
isn't there, something is wrong and the brakes 
won't work. 
7.2.2 – Uncoupling Twin Trailers 
Uncouple Rear Trailer 
Park rig in a straight line on firm level ground. 
Apply parking brakes so rig won't move. 
Chock wheels of second trailer if it doesn't have 
spring brakes. 
Lower landing gear of second semitrailer enough 
to remove some weight from dolly. 
Close air shut-offs at rear of first semitrailer (and 
on dolly if so equipped). 
Disconnect all dolly air and electric lines and 
secure them. 
Release dolly brakes. 
Release converter dolly fifth wheel latch. 
Slowly pull tractor, first semitrailer, and dolly 
forward to pull dolly out from under rear semitrailer. 
Section 7 - Doubles and Triples 
Page 7-2 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Uncouple Converter Dolly 
Lower dolly landing gear. 
Disconnect safety chains. 
Apply converter gear spring brakes or chock 
wheels. 
Release pintle hook on first semi-trailer. 
Slowly pull clear of dolly. 
Never unlock the pintle hook with the dolly still under 
the rear trailer. The dolly tow bar may fly up, 
possibly causing injury, and making it very difficult 
to re-couple. 
7.2.3 – Coupling and Uncoupling Triple Trailers 
Couple Tractor/First Semitrailer to 
Second/Third Trailers 
Couple tractor to first trailer. Use the method 
already described for coupling tractor-semitrailers. 
Move converter dolly into position and couple first 
trailer to second trailer using the method for 
coupling doubles. Triples rig is now complete. 
Uncouple Triple-trailer Rig 
Uncouple third trailer by pulling the dolly out, then 
unhitching the dolly using the method for 
uncoupling doubles. 
Uncouple remainder of rig as you would any 
double-bottom rig using the method already 
described. 
7.2.4 – Coupling and Uncoupling Other 
Combinations 
The methods described so far apply to the more 
common tractor-trailer combinations. However, 
there are other ways of coupling and uncoupling the 
many types of truck-trailer and tractor-trailer 
combinations that are in use. There are too many to 
cover in this manual. You will need to learn the 
correct way to couple and uncouple the vehicle(s) 
you will drive according to the manufacturer and/or 
owner specifications. 
7.3 – Inspecting Doubles and Triples 
Use the seven-step inspection procedure described 
in Section 2 to inspect your combination vehicle. 
There are more things to inspect on a combination 
vehicle than on a single vehicle. Many of these 
items are simply more of what you would find on a 
single vehicle. (For example, tires, wheels, lights, 
reflectors, etc.) However, there are also some new 
things to check. These are discussed below. 
7.3.1 – Additional Checks 
Do these checks in addition to those already listed 
in Section 2, Step 5: Do a Walk-around Inspection. 
Coupling System Areas 
Check fifth wheel (lower). 
Securely mounted to frame. 
No missing or damaged parts. 
Enough grease. 
No visible space between upper and lower fifth 
wheel. 
Locking jaws around the shank, not the head of 
kingpin. 
Release arm properly seated and safety latch/lock 
engaged. 
Check fifth wheel (upper). 
Glide plate securely mounted to trailer frame. 
Kingpin not damaged. 
Air and electric lines to trailer. 
Electrical cord firmly plugged in and secured. 
Air-lines properly connected to glad hands, no air 
leaks, properly secured with enough slack for turns. 
All lines free from damage. 
Sliding fifth wheel. 
Slide not damaged or parts missing. 
Properly greased. 
All locking pins present and locked in place. 
If air powered, no air leaks. 
Check that fifth wheel is not so far forward that the 
tractor frame will hit landing gear, or cab will hit the 
trailer, during turns. 
Landing Gear 
Fully raised, no missing parts, not bent or 
otherwise damaged. 
Crank handle in place and secured. 
If power operated, no air or hydraulic leaks. 
Double and Triple Trailers 
Shut-off valves (at rear of trailers, in service and 
emergency lines). 
Rear of front trailers:  OPEN. 
Rear of last trailer:  CLOSED. 
Section 7 - Doubles and Triples 
Page 7-3 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Converter dolly air tank drain valve:  CLOSED. 
Be sure air-lines are supported and glad hands are 
properly connected. 
If spare tire is carried on converter gear (dolly), 
make sure it's secured. 
Be sure pintle-eye of dolly is in place in pintle hook 
of trailer(s). 
Make sure pintle hook is latched. 
Safety chains should be secured to trailer(s). 
Be sure light cords are firmly in sockets on trailers. 
7.3.2 – Additional Things to Check during a 
Walk-around Inspection 
Do these checks in addition to subsection 5.3, 
Inspecting Air Brake Systems. 
7.4 – Doubles/Triples Air Brake Check 
Check the brakes on a double or triple trailer as you 
would any combination vehicle. Subsection 6.5.2 
explains how to check air brakes on combination 
vehicles. You must also make the following checks 
on your double or triple trailers 
7.4.1 – Additional Air Brake Checks 
Check That Air Flows to All Trailers (Double and 
Triple Trailers). Use the tractor parking brake 
and/or chock the wheels to hold the vehicle. Wait for 
air pressure to reach normal, then push in the red 
"trailer air supply" knob. This will supply air to the 
emergency (supply) lines. Use the trailer handbrake 
to provide air to the service line. Go to the rear of 
the rig. Open the emergency line shut-off valve at 
the rear of the last trailer. You should hear air 
escaping, showing the entire system is charged. 
Close the emergency line valve. Open the service 
line valve to check that service pressure goes 
through all the trailers (this test assumes that the 
trailer handbrake or the service brake pedal is on), 
and then close the valve. If you do NOT hear air 
escaping from both lines, check that the shut-off 
valves on the trailer(s) and dolly(ies) are in the 
OPEN position. You MUST have air all the way to 
the back for all the brakes to work. 
Test Tractor Protection Valve. Charge the trailer 
air brake system. (That is, build up normal air 
pressure and push the "air supply" knob in.) Shut 
the engine off. Step on and off the brake pedal 
several times to reduce the air pressure in the tanks. 
The trailer air supply control (also called the tractor 
protection valve control) should pop out (or go from 
"normal" to "emergency" position) when the air 
pressure falls into the pressure range specified by 
the manufacturer. (Usually within the range of 20 to 
45 psi.) 
If the tractor protection valve doesn't work properly, 
an air hose or trailer brake leak could drain all the 
air from the tractor. This would cause the 
emergency brakes to come on, with possible loss of 
control. 
Test Trailer Emergency Brakes. Charge the trailer 
air brake system and check that the trailer rolls 
freely. Then stop and pull out the trailer air supply 
control (also called tractor protection valve control 
or trailer emergency valve) or place it in the 
"emergency" position. Pull gently on the trailer with 
the tractor to check that the trailer emergency 
brakes are on. 
Test Trailer Service Brakes. Check for normal air 
pressure, release the parking brakes, move the 
vehicle forward slowly, and apply trailer brakes with 
the hand control (trolley valve), if so equipped. You 
should feel the brakes come on. This tells you the 
trailer brakes are connected and working. (The 
trailer brakes should be tested with the hand valve, 
but controlled in normal operation with the foot 
pedal, which applies air to the service brakes at all 
wheels.) 
Section 7  
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
What is a converter dolly? 
Do converter dollies have spring brakes? 
What three methods can you use to secure a 
second trailer before coupling? 
How do you check to make sure trailer height 
is correct before coupling? 
What do you check when making a visual 
check of coupling? 
Why should you pull a dolly out from under a 
trailer before you disconnect it from the trailer 
in front? 
What should you check for when inspecting 
the converter dolly? The pintle hook? 
Should the shut-off valves on the rear of the 
last trailer be open or closed? On the first 
trailer in a set of doubles? On the middle 
trailer of a set of triples? 
How can you test that air flows to all trailers? 
10. How do you know if your converter dolly is 
equipped with antilock brakes? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read Section 7.
Section 7 - Doubles and Triples 
Page 7-4 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 8  
TANK VEHICLES 
This Section Covers 
• Inspecting Tank Vehicles 
• Driving Tank Vehicles 
• Safe Driving Rules 
This section has information needed to pass the 
CDL knowledge test for driving a tank vehicle. (You 
should also study Sections 2, 5, 6, and 9). A tank 
endorsement is required for certain vehicles that 
transport liquids or gases. The liquid or gas does not 
have to be a hazardous material. A tank 
endorsement is required if your vehicle needs a 
Class A or B CDL and you want to haul a liquid or 
liquid gas in a tank or tanks having an individual 
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an 
aggregate rated capacity of 1000 gallons or more 
that is either permanently or temporarily attached to 
the vehicle or the chassis.  A tank endorsement is 
also required for Class C vehicles when the vehicle 
is used to transport hazardous materials in liquid or 
gas form in the above described rated tanks. 
Before loading, unloading, or driving a tanker, 
inspect the vehicle. This makes sure that the vehicle 
is safe to carry the liquid or gas and is safe to drive. 
8.1 – Inspecting Tank Vehicles 
Tank vehicles have special items that you need to 
check. Tank vehicles come in many types and sizes. 
You need to check the vehicle's operator manual to 
make sure you know how to inspect your tank 
vehicle. 
8.1.1 – Leaks 
On all tank vehicles, the most important item to 
check for is leaks. Check under and around the 
vehicle for signs of any leaking. Don't carry liquids 
or gases in a leaking tank. To do so is a crime. You 
will be cited and prevented from driving further. You 
may also be liable for the clean-up of any spill. In 
general, check the following: 
Check the tank's body or shell for dents or leaks. 
Check the intake, discharge, and cut-off valves. 
Make sure the valves are in the correct position 
before loading, unloading, or moving the vehicle. 
Check pipes, connections, and hoses for leaks, 
especially around joints. 
Check manhole covers and vents. Make sure the 
covers have gaskets and they close correctly. 
Keep the vents clear so they work correctly. 
8.1.2 – Check Special Purpose Equipment 
If your vehicle has any of the following equipment, 
make sure it works: 
Vapor recovery kits. 
Grounding and bonding cables. 
Emergency shut-off systems. 
Built in fire extinguisher. 
Never drive a tank vehicle with open valves or 
manhole covers. 
8.1.3 – Special Equipment 
Check the emergency equipment required for your 
vehicle. Find out what equipment you're required to 
carry and make sure you have it (and it works). 
8.2 – Driving Tank Vehicles 
Hauling liquids in tanks requires special skills 
because of the high center of gravity and liquid 
movement. See Figure 8.1. 
Figure 8.1 
8.2.1 – High Center of Gravity 
High center of gravity means that much of the load's 
weight is carried high up off the road. This makes 
the vehicle top-heavy and easy to roll over. Liquid 
tankers are especially easy to roll over. Tests have 
shown that tankers can turn over at the speed limits 
posted for curves. Take highway curves and on 
ramp/off ramp curves well below the posted speeds. 
8.2.2 – Danger of Surge 
Liquid surge results from movement of the liquid in 
partially filled tanks. This movement can have bad 
effects on handling. For example, when coming to a 
stop, the liquid will surge back and forth. When the 
Section 8 - Tank Vehicles 
Page 8-8-1 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
wave hits the end of the tank, it tends to push the 
truck in the direction the wave is moving. If the truck 
is on a slippery surface such as ice, the wave can 
shove a stopped truck out into an intersection. The 
driver of a liquid tanker must be very familiar with 
the handling of the vehicle. 
8.2.3 – Bulkheads 
Some liquid tanks are divided into several smaller 
tanks by bulkheads. When loading and unloading 
the smaller tanks, the driver must pay attention to 
weight distribution. Don't put too much weight on the 
front or rear of the vehicle. 
8.2.4 – Baffled Tanks 
Baffled liquid tanks have bulkheads in them with 
holes that let the liquid flow through. The baffles 
help to control the forward and backward liquid 
surge. Side-to-side surge can still occur. This can 
cause a roll over.  
8.2.5 – Un-baffled Tanks 
Un-baffled liquid tankers (sometimes called 
"smooth bore" tanks) have nothing inside to slow 
down the flow of the liquid. Therefore, forward-and
back surge is very strong. Un-baffled tanks are 
usually those that transport food products (milk, for 
example). (Sanitation regulations forbid the use of 
baffles because of the difficulty in cleaning the 
inside of the tank.) Be extremely cautious (slow and 
careful) in driving smooth bore tanks, especially 
when starting and stopping. 
8.2.6 – Outage 
Never load a cargo tank totally full. Liquids expand 
as they warm and you must leave room for the 
expanding liquid. This is called "outage." Since 
different liquids expand by different amounts, they 
require different amounts of outage. You must know 
the outage requirement when hauling liquids in bulk. 
8.2.7 – How Much to Load? 
A full tank of dense liquid (such as some acids) may 
exceed legal weight limits. For that reason, you may 
often only partially fill tanks with heavy liquids. The 
amount of liquid to load into a tank depends on: 
The amount the liquid will expand in transit. 
The weight of the liquid. 
Legal weight limits. 
8.3 – Safe Driving Rules 
In order to drive tank vehicles safely, you must 
remember to follow all the safe driving rules. A few 
of these rules are: 
8.3.1 – Drive Smoothly 
Because of the high center of gravity and the surge 
of the liquid, you must start, slow down, and stop 
very smoothly. Also, make smooth turns and lane 
changes. 
8.3.2 – Controlling Surge 
Keep a steady pressure on the brakes. Do not 
release too soon when coming to a stop. 
Brake far in advance of a stop and increase your 
following distance. 
If you must make a quick stop to avoid a crash, use 
controlled or stab braking. If you do not remember 
how to stop using these methods, review subsection 
2.17.2. Also, remember that if you steer quickly 
while braking, your vehicle may roll over. 
8.3.3 – Curves 
Slow down before curves, then accelerate slightly 
through the curve. The posted speed for a curve 
may be too fast for a tank vehicle. 
8.3.4 – Stopping Distance 
Keep in mind how much space you need to stop 
your vehicle. Remember that wet roads double the 
normal stopping distance. Empty tank vehicles may 
take longer to stop than full ones. 
8.3.5 – Skids 
Don't over steer, over accelerate, or over brake. If 
you do, your vehicle may skid. On tank trailers, if 
your drive wheels or trailer wheels begin to skid, 
your vehicle may jackknife. When any vehicle starts 
to skid, you must take action to restore traction to 
the wheels. 
Section 8 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
How are bulkheads different than baffles? 
Should a tank vehicle take curves, on 
ramps, or off ramps at the posted speed 
limits? 
How are smooth bore tankers different to 
drive than those with baffles? 
What three things determine how much 
liquid you can load? 
What is outage? 
How can you help control surge? 
What two reasons make special care 
necessary when driving tank vehicles? 
These questions may be on the test. If you can't 
answer them all, re-read Section 8. 
Section 8 - Tank Vehicles 
Page 8-8-2 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 9  
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
This Section Covers 
• The Intent of the Regulations 
• Bulk Tank Loading, Unloading, and 
Marking 
• Driver Responsibilities 
• Driving and Parking Rules 
• Communications Rules 
• Emergencies 
• Loading and Unloading 
Hazardous materials are products that pose a risk 
to health, safety, and property during transportation. 
The term often is shortened to HAZMAT, which you 
may see on road signs, or to HM in government 
regulations. 
Hazardous 
materials 
include 
explosives, various types of gas, solids, flammable 
and combustible liquid, and other materials. 
Because of the risks involved and the potential 
consequences these risks impose, all levels of 
government regulate the handling of hazardous 
materials. 
The Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) is 
found in parts  171 - 180 of title 49 of the Code of 
Federal Regulations. The common reference for 
these regulations is 49 CFR  171 - 180 
The Hazardous Materials Table in the regulations 
contains a list of these items. However, this list is 
not all-inclusive. Whether or not a material is 
considered hazardous is based on its 
characteristics and the shipper's decision on 
whether or not the material meets a definition of a 
hazardous material in the regulations. 
The regulations require vehicles transporting certain 
types or quantities of hazardous materials to display 
diamond-shaped, square on point, warning signs 
called placards. 
This section is designed to assist you in 
understanding your role and responsibilities in 
hauling hazardous materials. Due to the constantly 
changing nature of government regulations, it is 
impossible to guarantee absolute accuracy of the 
materials in this section. An up-to-date copy of the 
complete regulations is essential for you to have. 
Included in these regulations is a complete glossary 
of terms. 
You must have a commercial driver license (CDL) 
with a hazardous materials endorsement before you 
drive any size vehicle that is used to transport 
hazardous material as defined in 49 CFR 383.5. 
You must pass a written test about the regulations 
and requirements to get this endorsement.  
Everything you need to know to pass the written test 
is in this section. However, this is only a beginning. 
Most drivers need to know much more on the job. 
You can learn more by reading and understanding 
the federal and state rules applicable to hazardous 
materials, as well as, attending hazardous materials 
training courses. Your employer, colleges and 
universities, and various associations usually offer 
these courses. You can get copies of the Federal 
Regulations (49 CFR) through your local 
Government Printing Office bookstore and various 
industry publishers. Union or company offices often 
have copies of the rules for driver use. Find out 
where you can get your own copy to use on the job. 
The regulations require training and testing for all 
drivers 
involved in transporting hazardous 
materials. Your employer or a designated 
representative is required to provide this training 
and testing. Hazardous materials employers are 
required to keep a record of training for each 
employee as long as that employee is working with 
hazardous materials, and for 90 days thereafter. 
The regulations require that hazardous materials 
employees be trained and tested at least once every 
three years. 
All drivers must be trained in the security risks of 
hazardous materials transportation. This training 
must include how to recognize and respond to 
possible security threats. 
The regulations also require that drivers have 
special training before driving a vehicle transporting 
certain flammable gas materials or highway route 
controlled quantities of radioactive materials. In 
addition, drivers transporting cargo tanks and 
portable tanks must receive specialized training. 
Each driver’s employer or his or her designated 
representative must provide such training. 
Some locations require permits to transport certain 
explosives or bulk hazardous wastes. States and 
counties also may require drivers to follow special 
hazardous materials routes. The federal 
government may require permits or exemptions for 
special hazardous materials cargo such as rocket 
fuel. Find out about permits, exemptions, and 
special routes for the places you drive.  
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-1  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
9.1 – The Intent of the Regulations 
9.1.1 – Contain the Material 
Transporting hazardous materials can be risky. The 
regulations are intended to protect you, those 
around you, and the environment. They tell shippers 
how to package the materials safely and drivers how 
to load, transport, and unload the material. These 
are called "containment rules." 
9.1.2 – Communicate the Risk 
To communicate the risk, shippers must warn 
drivers and others about the material's hazards. The 
regulations require shippers to put hazard warning 
labels on packages, provide proper shipping 
papers, emergency response information, and 
placards. These steps communicate the hazard to 
the shipper, the carrier, and the driver. 
9.1.3 – Assure Safe Drivers and Equipment 
In order to get a hazardous materials endorsement 
on a CDL, you must pass a written test about 
transporting hazardous materials. To pass the test, 
you must know how to: 
Identify what are hazardous materials. 
Safely load shipments. 
Properly placard your vehicle in accordance with 
the rules. 
Safely transport shipments. 
Learn the rules and follow them. Following the rules 
reduces the risk of injury from hazardous materials. 
Taking shortcuts by breaking rules is unsafe. Non
compliance with regulations can result in fines and 
jail. 
Inspect your vehicle before and during each trip. 
Law enforcement officers may stop and inspect your 
vehicle. When stopped, they may check your 
shipping papers, vehicle placards, and the 
hazardous materials endorsement on your driver 
license, and your knowledge of hazardous 
materials. 
9.2 – Hazardous Materials 
Transportation—Who Does What 
9.2.1 – The Shipper 
Sends products from one place to another by truck, 
rail, vessel, or airplane. 
Uses the hazardous materials regulations to 
determine the product’s: 
Identification number 
Proper shipping name. 
Hazard class. 
Packing group. 
Correct packaging. 
Correct label and markings. 
Correct placards. 
Must package, mark, and label the materials; 
prepare shipping papers; provide emergency 
response information; and supply placards. 
Certify on the shipping paper that the shipment has 
been prepared according to the rules (unless you 
are pulling cargo tanks supplied by you or your 
employer).  
9.2.2 – The Carrier 
Takes the shipment from the shipper to its 
destination. 
Prior to transportation, checks that the shipper 
correctly described, marked, labeled, and 
otherwise prepared the shipment for transportation. 
Refuses improper shipments. 
9.2.3 – The Driver 
Makes sure the shipper has identified, marked, and 
labeled the hazardous materials properly. 
Refuses leaking packages and shipments. 
Placards vehicle when loading, if required. 
Safely transports the shipment without delay. 
Follows all special rules about transporting 
hazardous materials. 
Keeps hazardous materials shipping papers and 
emergency response information in the proper 
place. 
Reports accidents and incidents involving 
hazardous materials to the proper government 
agency, when the accident/incident occurs while 
driver is in physical control of the shipment. 
9.3 – Communication Rules 
9.3.1 – Definitions 
Some words and phrases have special meanings 
when talking about hazardous materials. Some of 
these may differ from meanings you are used to. 
The words and phrases in this section may be on 
your test. The meanings of other important words 
are in the glossary at the end of Section 9. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-2  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
A material's hazard class reflects the risks 
associated with it. There are nine different hazard 
classes. The types of materials included in these 
nine classes are in Figure 9.1. 
Hazardous Materials Class 
Class 
Division 
Name of Class or 
Division 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
Mass Explosion 
Projection Hazard 
Fire Hazard 
Minor Explosion 
Very Insensitive 
Extremely 
Insensitive 
Examples 
Dynamite 
Flares 
Display Fireworks 
Ammunition 
Blasting Agents 
Explosive Devices 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
Propane 
Helium 
Flammable Gases 
Non-Flammable 
Gases 
Poisonous/Toxic 
Gases 
Fluorine, Compressed 
3 - 
Flammable Liquids 
Gasoline 
4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
Flammable Solids 
Spontaneously 
Combustible 
Dangerous When 
Wet 
Ammonium Picrate, 
Wetted 
White Phosphorus 
Sodium 
5 
5.1 
5.2 
Oxidizers 
Organic Peroxides 
Ammonium Nitrate 
Methyl Ethyl Ketone 
Peroxide 
6.1 
6 
6.2 
Potassium Cyanide 
Poison (Toxic 
Material) 
Infectious 
Substances 
Anthrax Virus 
7 - 
Radioactive 
Uranium 
8 - 
Corrosives 
Battery Fluid 
9 - 
Miscellaneous 
Hazardous Materials 
Polychlorinated 
Biphenyls (PCB) 
N
o
n
e - 
ORM-D (Other 
Regulated Material
Domestic) 
Food Flavorings, 
Medicines - 
Combustible Liquids 
Fuel Oil 
Figure 9.1 
A shipping paper describes the hazardous materials 
being transported. Shipping orders, bills of lading, 
and manifests are all shipping papers. Figure 9.6 
shows an example shipping paper. 
After an accident or hazardous materials spill or 
leak, you may be injured and unable to 
communicate the hazards of the materials you are 
transporting. Firefighters and police can prevent or 
reduce the amount of damage or injury at the scene 
if they know what hazardous materials are 
being carried. Your life, and the lives of others, may 
depend on quickly locating the hazardous materials 
shipping papers. For that reason the rules require: 
Shippers to describe hazardous materials correctly 
and include an emergency response telephone 
number on shipping papers. 
Carriers and drivers to quickly identify hazardous 
materials shipping papers, or keep them on top of 
other shipping papers and keep the required 
emergency response information with the shipping 
papers. 
Drivers to keep hazardous materials shipping 
papers: 
In a pouch on the driver's door, or 
In clear view within immediate reach while the seat 
belt is fastened while driving, or 
On the driver's seat when out of the vehicle. 
9.3.2 – Package Labels 
Shippers put diamond-shaped hazard warning 
labels on most hazardous materials packages. 
These labels inform others of the hazard. If the 
diamond label won't fit on the package, shippers 
may put the label on a tag securely attached to the 
package. For example, compressed gas cylinders 
that will not hold a label will have tags or decals. 
Labels look like the examples in Figure 9.2.  
Examples of HAZMAT Labels. Figure 9.2 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-3  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
9.3.3 – Lists of Regulated Products 
Placards. Placards are used to warn others of 
hazardous materials. Placards are signs put on the 
outside of a vehicle and on bulk packages, which 
identify the hazard class of the cargo. A placarded 
vehicle must have at least four identical placards. 
They are put on the front, rear, and both sides of the 
vehicle. See Figure 9.3. Placards must be readable 
from all four directions. They are at least 250mm 
9.84 inches square, square-on-point, in a diamond 
shape. Cargo tanks and other bulk packaging 
display the identification number of their contents on 
placards or orange panels or white square-on-point 
displays that are the same size as placards. 
Examples of HAZMAT Placards 
Figure 9.3 
Identification numbers are a four-digit code used by 
first responders to identify hazardous materials. An 
identification number may be used to identify more 
than one chemical. The letters “NA or “UN” will 
precede the identification number. The United 
States Department of Transportation’s Emergency 
Response Guidebook (ERG) lists the chemicals and 
the identification numbers assigned to them. 
There are three main lists used by shippers, 
carriers, and drivers when trying to identify 
hazardous materials. Before transporting a material, 
look for its name on three lists. Some materials are 
on all lists, others on only one. Always check the 
following lists: 
Section 172.101, the Hazardous Materials Table.  
Appendix A to Section 172.101, the List of 
Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities. 
Appendix B to Section 172.101, the List of Marine 
Pollutants. 
The Hazardous Materials Table. Figure 9.4 shows 
part of the Hazardous Materials Table.  
Column 1 tells which shipping mode(s) the entry 
affects and other information concerning the 
shipping description. The next five columns show 
each material's shipping name, hazard class or 
division, identification number, packaging group, 
and required labels. 
Six different symbols may appear in Column 1 of the 
table. 
(+) 
(A) 
(W) 
(D) 
(I) 
(G) 
Shows the proper shipping name, hazard 
class, and packing group to use, even if the 
material doesn't meet the hazard class 
definition. 
Means the hazardous material described in 
Column 2 is subject to the HMR only when 
offered or intended for transport by air 
unless it is a hazardous substance or 
hazardous waste. 
Means the hazardous material described in 
Column 2 is subject to the HMR only when 
offered or intended for transportation by 
water unless it is a hazardous substance, 
hazardous waste, or marine pollutant. 
Means the proper shipping name is 
appropriate for describing materials for 
domestic transportation, but may not be 
proper for international transportation.  
Identifies a proper shipping name that is 
used to describe materials in international 
transportation. A different shipping name 
may be used when only domestic 
transportation is involved. 
Means this hazardous material described in 
Column 2 is a generic shipping name. A 
generic 
shipping 
name 
must be 
accompanied by a technical name on the 
shipping paper. A technical name is a 
specific chemical that makes the product 
hazardous 
Column 2 lists the proper shipping names and 
descriptions of regulated materials. Entries are in 
alphabetical order so you can more quickly find the 
right entry. The table shows proper shipping names 
in regular type. The shipping paper must show 
proper shipping names. Names shown in italics are 
not proper shipping names. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-4  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-5  
Version: July 2022 
Figure 9.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.5 
 
 
Column 3 shows a material's hazard class or 
division, or the entry "Forbidden." Never transport a 
"Forbidden" material. Placard hazardous materials 
shipments based on the quantity and hazard class. 
You can decide which placards to use if you know 
these three things: 
Material's hazard class. 
Amount being shipped. 
Amount of all hazardous materials of all classes on 
your vehicle.  
Column 4 lists the identification number for each 
proper shipping name. Identification numbers are 
preceded by the letters “UN”, "NA." or “ID”. The 
letters "NA" are associated with proper shipping 
names that are only used within the United States 
and to and from Canada. The letters “ID” are 
associated with proper shipping names recognized 
by the International Civil Aviation Organization 
(IACO) Technical instructions for transportation by 
air. The identification number must appear on the 
shipping paper as part of the shipping description 
and also appear on the package. It also must 
appear on cargo tanks and other bulk packaging. 
Police and firefighters use this number to quickly 
identify the hazardous materials. 
 
Column 5 shows the packing group (in Roman 
numeral) assigned to a material. 
 
Column 6 shows the hazard warning label(s) 
shippers must put on packages of hazardous 
materials. Some products require use of more than 
one label due to a multiple hazards being present.  
 
49 CFR 172.101 Hazardous Materials Table 
Symbols 
Hazardous Materials 
Description & Proper 
Shipping Names 
Hazard 
Class or 
Division 
Identification 
Numbers PG Label 
Codes 
Special 
Provisions 
(172.102) 
Packaging (173. ***) 
Exceptions Non 
Bulk Bulk 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8A) (8B) (8C) 
A Acetaldehyde ammonia 9 UN1841 III 9 IB8, IP3, 
IP7, T1, 
TP33 
155 204 240 
Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101 
List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities 
Hazardous Substances 
 
Reportable Quantity (RQ) Pounds 
(Kilograms) 
Phenyl mercaptan   
100 (45.4) 
Phenylmercury acetate 100 (45.4) 
Phenylthiourea  100 (45.4) 
Phorate 10 (4.54) 
Phosgene  
10 (4.54) 
Phosphine  
100  (45.4)  
Phosphoric acid  
5,000 (2270) 
Phosphoric acid, diethyl 
4-nitrophenyl ester 100 (45.4) 
Phosphoric acid, lead (2+) 
Salt (2:3)salt 
 
10 (.454) 
 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Column 7 lists the additional (special) provisions 
that apply to this material. When there is an entry in 
this column, you must refer to the federal 
regulations for specific information. The numbers 1
6 in this column mean the hazardous material is a 
poison inhalation hazard (PIH). PIH materials have 
special requirements for shipping papers, marking, 
and placards. 
Column 8 is a three-part column showing the 
section numbers covering the packaging 
requirements for each hazardous material. 
Note: Columns 9 and 10 do not apply to 
transportation by highway. 
Appendix A to 49 CFR 172.101 - The List of 
Hazardous Substances and Reportable 
Quantities. The DOT and the EPA want to know 
about spills of hazardous substances. They are 
named in the List of Hazardous Substances and 
Reportable Quantities. See Figure 9.5. Column 2 of 
the list shows each product's reportable quantity 
(RQ). When these materials are being transported 
in a reportable quantity or greater in one package, 
the shipper displays the letters RQ on the shipping 
paper and package. The letters RQ may appear 
before or after the basic description. You or your 
employer must report any spill of these materials, 
which occurs in a reportable quantity. 
If the words INHALATION HAZARD appear on the 
shipping paper or package, the rules require display 
of the POISON INHALATION HAZARD or POISON 
GAS placards, as appropriate. These placards must 
be used in addition to other placards, which may be 
required by the product's hazard class. Always 
display the hazard class placard and the POISON 
INHALATION HAZARD placard, even for small 
amounts. 
Appendix B to 49 CFR 172.101 – List of Marine 
Pollutants 
Appendix B is a listing of chemicals that are toxic to 
marine life. For highway transportation, this list is 
only used for chemicals in a container with a 
capacity of 119 gallons or more without a placard or 
label as specified by the HMR. 
Any bulk packages of a Marine Pollutant must 
display the Marine Pollutant marking (white triangle 
with a fish and an “X” through the fish). This marking 
(it is not a placard) must also be displayed on the 
outside of the vehicle. In addition, a notation must 
be made on the shipping papers near the 
description of the material:  “Marine Pollutant”. 
9.3.4 – The Shipping Paper 
The shipping paper shown in Figure 9.6 describes a 
shipment. A shipping paper for hazardous materials 
must include: 
Page numbers if the shipping paper has more than 
one page. The first page must tell the total number 
of pages. For example, "Page 1 of 4". 
A proper shipping description for each hazardous 
material. 
A shipper's certification, signed by the shipper, 
saying they prepared the shipment according to 
the regulations. 
Shipping Paper 
TO: 
ABC 
Corporation 
88 Valley 
Street 
Anywhere, 
VA 
Page 
1 of 1 
FROM
: 
Quantity 
HM 
DEF 
Corporatio
n 
55 
Mountain 
Street 
Nowhere, 
CO 
Description 
1 
cylinder 
RQ 
(“RQ” 
means that 
this
 is
reportable 
quantity.) 
 a 
UN1076,Phosgene
, 2.3,  
Poison, Inhalation 
Hazard,  
Zone A 
(UN1076 is the 
Identification 
Number from 
Column 4 of the 
Hazardous 
materials Table.  
Phosgene is the 
proper shipping 
name from Column 
2 of the Hazardous 
Materials Table.   
Weight 
25 lbs 
2.3 is the Hazard 
Class from Column 
3 of the Hazardous 
Materials Table.)  
This is to certify that the above named materials are 
properly classified, described, packaged, marked and 
labeled, and are in proper condition for transportation 
according to the applicable regulations of the 
Department of Transportation. 
Shipper
: 
Per: 
Date: 
DEF 
Corporatio
n 
Carrier: 
Per: 
Date: 
Safet
y First 
Smith 
October 15, 
2003 
Special Instructions:  24 hour Emergency Contact, 
John Smith 1-800-555-5555 
Figure 9.6 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-6  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
9.3.5 – The Item Description 
If a shipping paper describes both hazardous and 
non-hazardous products, the hazardous materials 
must be:  
Entered first. 
Highlighted in a contrasting color, OR. 
Identified by an "X" placed before the shipping 
description (ID#, Shipping Name, Hazard Class, 
Packing Group) in a column captioned "HM". The 
letters "RQ" may be used instead of "X" if a 
reportable quantity needs to be identified. 
The basic description of hazardous materials 
includes the identification number, proper shipping 
name, hazard class or division, and the packing 
group, if any, in that order. The packing group is 
displayed in Roman numerals and may be preceded 
by "PG". 
Identification number, shipping name, and hazard 
class must not be abbreviated unless specifically 
authorized in the hazardous materials regulations. 
The description must also show: 
The total quantity and unit of measure. 
The number and type of packages (example: “6 
Drums”). 
The letters RQ, if a reportable quantity. 
If the letters RQ appear, the name of the 
hazardous substance (if not included in the 
shipping name). 
For all materials with the letter “G” (Generic) in 
Column 1, the technical name of the hazardous 
material. 
Shipping papers also must list an emergency 
response telephone number (unless excepted). The 
emergency response telephone number is the 
responsibility of the shipper. It can be used by 
emergency responders to obtain information about 
any hazardous materials involved in a spill or fire.   
The telephone number must be: 
The number of the person offering the hazardous 
material for transportation (if the shipper/offerer is 
the emergency response information (ERI) 
provider); or 
The number of an agency or organization capable 
of, and accepting responsibility for, providing the 
detailed information required by paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section. The person who is registered with the 
ERI provider must be identified by name, or contract 
number or other unique identifier assigned by the 
ERI provider, on the shipping paper 
Shippers also must provide emergency response 
information to the motor carrier for each hazardous 
material being shipped. The emergency response 
information must be able to be used away from the 
motor vehicle and must provide information on how 
to safely handle incidents involving the material. At 
a 
minimum, it must include the following 
information: 
The basic description and technical name; 
Immediate hazards to health; 
Risks of fire or explosion; 
Immediate precautions to be taken in the event of 
an accident or incident; 
Immediate methods for handling fires; 
Initial methods for handling spills or leaks in the 
absence of fires; and 
Preliminary first aid measures 
Such information can be on the shipping paper or 
some other document that includes the basic 
description and technical name of the hazardous 
material. Or, it may be in a guidance book such as 
the Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG). Motor 
carriers may assist shippers by keeping an ERG on 
each vehicle carrying hazardous materials. The 
driver must provide the emergency response 
information to any federal, state, or local authority 
responding to a hazardous materials incident or 
investigating one. 
Total quantity and number & type of packages must 
appear before or after the basic description. The 
packaging type and the unit of measurement may 
be abbreviated. For example: 
10 ctns. UN1263, Paint, 3, PG II, 500 lbs. 
The shipper of hazardous wastes must put the word 
WASTE before the proper shipping name of the 
material on the shipping paper (hazardous waste 
manifest). For example: 
UN1090, Waste Acetone, 3, PG II. 
A non-hazardous material may not be described by 
using a hazard class or an identification number. 
Shippers must keep a copy of shipping papers (or 
an electronic image) for a period of 2 years (3 years 
for hazardous waste) after the material is accepted 
by the initial carrier. 
If one provides a carrier service only and is not the 
originator of the shipment, a carrier is required to 
keep a copy of the shipping paper (or an electronic 
image) for a period of 1 year. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-7  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
9.3.8 – Recognizing Hazardous Materials 
IMPORTANT NOTE: To view complete regulatory 
requirements for the transportation of hazardous 
materials one should refer to the Code of Federal 
Regulations, Title 49, Parts 171-185.  
9.3.6 – Shipper's Certification 
When the shipper packages hazardous materials, 
he/she certifies that the package has been prepared 
according to the rules. The signed shipper's 
certification appears on the original shipping paper. 
The only exceptions are when a shipper is a private 
carrier transporting their own product and when the 
package is provided by the carrier (for example, a 
cargo tank). Unless a package is clearly unsafe or 
does not comply with the HMR, you may accept the 
shipper's certification concerning proper packaging. 
Some carriers have additional rules about 
transporting hazardous materials. Follow your 
employer's rules when accepting shipments. 
9.3.7 – Package Markings and Labels 
Shippers print required markings directly on the 
package, an attached label, or tag. An important 
package marking is the name of the hazardous 
material. It is the same name as the one on the 
shipping paper. The requirements for marking vary 
by package size and material being transported. 
When required, the shipper will put the following on 
the package: 
The name and address of shipper or consignee. 
The hazardous material's shipping name and 
identification number. 
The labels required. 
It is a good idea to compare the shipping paper to 
the markings and labels. Always make sure that the 
shipper shows the correct basic description on the 
shipping paper, and verifies that the proper labels 
are shown on the packages. If you are not familiar 
with the material, ask the shipper to contact your 
office.  
If rules require it, the shipper will put RQ, MARINE 
POLLUTANT,
 BIOHAZARD, 
HOT, 
or 
INHALATION-HAZARD on the package. Packages 
with liquid containers inside will also have package 
orientation markings with the arrows pointing in the 
correct upright direction. The labels used always 
reflect the hazard class of the product. If a package 
needs more than one label, the labels must be close 
together, near the proper shipping name. 
Learn to recognize shipments of hazardous 
materials. To find out if the shipment includes 
hazardous materials, look at the shipping paper. 
Does it have: 
An entry with a proper shipping name, hazard 
class, and identification number? 
A highlighted entry, or one with an X or RQ in the 
hazardous materials column? 
Other clues suggesting hazardous materials: 
What business is the shipper in? Paint dealer? 
Chemical supply? Scientific supply house? Pest 
control or agricultural supplier? Explosives, 
munitions, or fireworks dealer? 
Are there tanks with diamond labels or placards on 
the premises? 
What type of package is being shipped? Cylinders 
and drums are often used for hazardous materials 
shipments. 
Is a hazard class label, proper shipping name, or 
identification number on the package? 
Are there any handling precautions? 
9.3.9 – Hazardous Waste Manifest 
When transporting hazardous wastes, you must 
sign by hand and carry a Uniform Hazardous Waste 
Manifest. The name and EPA registration number of 
the shippers, carriers, and destination must appear 
on the manifest. Shippers must prepare, date, and 
sign by hand the manifest. Treat the manifest as a 
shipping paper when transporting the waste. Only 
give the waste shipment to another registered 
carrier or disposal/treatment facility. Each carrier 
transporting the shipment must sign by hand the 
manifest. After you deliver the shipment, keep your 
copy of the manifest. Each copy must have all 
needed signatures and dates, including those of the 
person to whom you delivered the waste.  
9.3.10 – Placarding 
Attach the appropriate placards to the vehicle 
before you drive it. You are only allowed to move an 
improperly placarded vehicle during an emergency, 
in order to protect life or property. 
Placards must appear on both sides and both ends 
of the vehicle. Each placard must be: 
Easily seen from the direction it faces. 
Placed so the words or numbers are level and read 
from left to right. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-8  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
At least three inches away from any other 
markings. 
Kept clear of attachments or devices such as 
ladders, doors, and tarpaulins. 
Kept clean and undamaged so that the color, 
format, and message are easily seen. 
Be affixed to a background of contrasting color. 
The use of “Drive Safely” and other slogans is 
prohibited. 
The front placard may be on the front of the tractor 
or the front of the trailer. 
To decide which placards to use, you need to know: 
The hazard class of the materials. 
The amount of hazardous materials shipped. 
The total weight of all classes of hazardous 
materials in your vehicle. 
9.3.11 – Placard Tables 
There are two placard tables, Table 1 and Table 2. 
Table 1 materials must be placarded whenever any 
amount is transported. See Figure 9.7. 
Except for bulk packaging, the hazard classes in 
Table 2 need placards only if the total amount 
transported is 1,001 pounds or more including the 
package. Add the amounts from all shipping papers 
for all the Table 2 products you have on board. See 
Figure 9.8. 
Placard Table 1 
Any Amount 
IF YOUR VEHICLE 
CONTAINS ANY AMOUNT 
OF…… 
PLACARD AS… 
1.1 Mass Explosives 
1.2 Project Hazards 
Explosives 1.1 
Explosives 1.2 
1.3 Mass Fire Hazards 
2.3 Poisonous/Toxic Gases 
Explosives 1.3  
Poison Gas 
Dangerous When 
Wet 
4.3 Dangerous When Wet 
5.2 (Organic Peroxide, Type 
B, liquid or solid, 
Temperature controlled) 
Organic Peroxide 
6.1 (Inhalation hazard zone 
A & B only) 
Poison/toxic 
inhalation 
7 (Radioactive Yellow III 
label only) 
Radioactive 
Figure 9.7 
You may use DANGEROUS placards instead of 
separate placards for each Table 2 hazard class 
when: 
You have 1,001 pounds or more of two or more 
Table 2 hazard classes, requiring different 
placards, and 
You have not loaded 2,205 pounds or more of any 
Table 2 hazard class material at any one place. 
(You must use the specific placard for this 
material.) 
The dangerous placard is an option, not a 
requirement. You can always placard for the 
materials. 
If the words INHALATION HAZARD are on the 
shipping paper or package, you must display 
POISON GAS or POISON INHALATION placards in 
addition to any other placards needed by the 
product's hazard class. The 1,000 pound exception 
does not apply to these materials. 
Materials with a secondary hazard of dangerous 
when wet must display the DANGEROUS WHEN 
WET placard in addition to any other placards 
needed by the product’s hazard class. The 1,000
pound exception to placarding does not apply to 
these materials. 
Placard Table 2 
1,001 Pounds Or More 
Category of Material (Hazard 
class or division number and 
additional description, as 
appropriate) 
Placard Name 
1.4 Minor Explosion 
1.5 Very Insensitive 
Explosives 1.6 
Explosives 1.4 
Explosives 1.5 
1.6 Extremely Insensitive 
2.1 Flammable Gases 
2.2 Non- Flammable Gases 
Flammable Gas 
Non-Flammable Gas. 
3 Flammable Liquids 
Flammable 
Combustible Liquid  
4.1 Flammable Solids  
Combustible* 
Flammable Solid 
4.2 Spontaneously 
Combustible 
Spontaneously 
Combustible 
5.1 Oxidizers 
Oxidizer 
5.2 (other than organic 
peroxide, Type B, liquid or 
solid, Temperature 
Controlled) 
Organic Peroxide 
6.1 (other than inhalation 
hazard zone A or B) 
Poison 
6.2 Infectious Substances 
(None) 
8 Corrosives 
Corrosive 
Class 9** 
9 Miscellaneous Hazardous 
Materials 
ORM-D 
(None) 
*
     FLAMMABLE may be used in place of a 
COMBUSTIBLE on a cargo tank or portable tank.  
**   Class 9 Placard is not required for domestic 
transportation.  
Figure 9.8 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-9  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Placards used to identify the primary or subsidiary 
hazard class of a material must have the hazard 
class or division number displayed in the lower 
corner of the placard. Permanently affixed 
subsidiary hazard placards without the hazard class 
number may be used as long as they stay within 
color specifications.  
Placards may be displayed for hazardous materials 
even if not required so long as the placard identifies 
the hazard of the material being transported. 
Bulk packaging is a single container with a capacity 
greater than 119 gallons. A bulk package, and a 
vehicle transporting a bulk package, must be 
placarded, even if it only has the residue of a 
hazardous material. Certain bulk packages only 
have to be placarded on the two opposite sides or 
may display labels. All other bulk packages must be 
placarded on all four sides. 
Subsections 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Shippers package in order to (fill in the 
blank) the material. 
Driver placard their vehicle to (fill in the 
blank) the risk. 
What three things do you need to know to 
decide which placards (if any) you need? 
A hazardous materials identification 
number must appear on the (fill in the blank) 
and on the (fill in the blank). The 
identification number must also appear on 
cargo tanks and other bulk packaging. 
Where must you keep shipping papers 
describing hazardous materials?  
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 9.1, 9.2 and 
9.3. 
9.4 – Loading and Unloading 
Do all you can to protect containers of hazardous 
materials. Don't use any tools, which might damage 
containers or other packaging during loading. Don't 
use hooks. 
9.4.1 – General Loading Requirements 
Before loading or unloading, set the parking brake. 
Make sure the vehicle will not move. 
Many products become more hazardous when 
exposed to heat. Load hazardous materials away 
from heat sources. 
Watch for signs of leaking or damaged containers:  
LEAKS SPELL TROUBLE! Do not transport leaking 
packages. Depending on the material, you, your 
truck, and others could be in danger. It is illegal to 
move a vehicle with leaking hazardous materials. 
Containers of hazardous materials must be braced 
to prevent movement of the packages during 
transportation. 
No Smoking. When loading or unloading 
hazardous materials, keep fire away. Don't let 
people smoke nearby. Never smoke around: 
Class 1 (Explosives) 
Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas ) 
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) 
Class 5 (Oxidizers) 
Secure Against Movement. Brace containers so 
they will not fall, slide, or bounce around during 
transportation. Be very careful when loading 
containers that have valves or other fittings. All 
hazardous materials packages must be secured 
during transportation. 
After loading, do not open any package during your 
trip. Never transfer hazardous materials from one 
package to another while in transit. You may empty 
a cargo tank, but do not empty any other package 
while it is on the vehicle. 
Cargo Heater Rules. There are special cargo heater 
rules for loading: 
Class 1 (Explosives) 
Class 2.1 (Flammable Gas ) 
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) 
The rules usually forbid use of cargo heaters, 
including automatic cargo heater/air conditioner 
units. Unless you have read all the related rules, 
don't load the above products in a cargo space that 
has a heater. 
Use Closed Cargo Space. You cannot have 
overhang or tailgate loads of: 
Class 1 (Explosives) 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) 
Class 5 (Oxidizers) 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-10  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
You must load these hazardous materials into a 
closed cargo space unless all packages are: 
Fire and water resistant. 
Covered with a fire and water resistant tarp. 
Precautions for Specific Hazards 
Class 1 (Explosives) Materials. Turn your engine 
off before loading or unloading any explosives. 
Then check the cargo space. You must: 
Disable cargo heaters. Disconnect heater power 
sources and drain heater fuel tanks. 
Make sure there are no sharp points that might 
damage cargo. Look for bolts, screws, nails, 
broken side panels, and broken floorboards. 
Use a floor lining with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3.   
The floors must be tight and the liner must be 
either non-metallic material or non-ferrous metal. 
(Non-ferrous metals are any metal that does not 
contain iron or iron alloys). 
Use extra care to protect explosives. Never use 
hooks or other metal tools. Never drop, throw, or roll 
packages. Protect explosive packages from other 
cargo that might cause damage. 
Do not transfer a Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 from one 
vehicle to another on a public roadway except in an 
emergency. If safety requires an emergency 
transfer, set out red warning reflectors, flags, or 
electric lanterns. You must warn others on the road. 
Never transport damaged packages of explosives. 
Do not take a package that shows any dampness or 
oily stain. 
Do not transport Division 1.1 or 1.2 in vehicle 
combinations if: 
There is a marked or placarded cargo tank in the 
combination. 
The other vehicle in the combination contains: 
Division 1.1 A (Initiating Explosives). 
Packages of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials 
labeled "Yellow III." 
Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) Hazard zone A or B or 
Division 6.1 (Poisonous) materials Hazard zone A. 
Hazardous materials in a portable tank, on a DOT 
Spec 106A or 110A tank. 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5 
(Oxidizers) Materials. Class 4 materials are solids 
that react (including fire and explosion) to water, 
heat, and air or even react spontaneously. 
Class 4 and 5 materials must be completely 
enclosed in a vehicle or covered securely. Class 4 
and 5 materials, which become unstable and 
dangerous when wet, must be kept dry while in 
transit and during loading and unloading. Materials 
that are subject to spontaneous combustion or 
heating must be in vehicles with sufficient 
ventilation. 
Class 8 (Corrosive) Materials. If loading by hand, 
load breakable containers of corrosive liquid one by 
one. Keep them right side up. Do not drop or roll the 
containers. Load them onto an even floor surface. 
Stack carboys only if the lower tiers can bear the 
weight of the upper tiers safely. 
Do not load nitric acid above any other product. 
Load charged storage batteries so their liquid won't 
spill. Keep them right side up. Make sure other 
cargo won't fall against or short circuit them. 
Never load corrosive liquids next to or above: 
Division 1.4 (Explosives C). 
Division 4.1 (Flammable Solids). 
Division 4.3 (Dangerous When Wet). 
Class 5 (Oxidizers). 
Division 2.3, Zone B (Poisonous Gases). 
Never load corrosive liquids with: 
Division 1.1 or 1.2 
Division 1.3 
Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents). 
Division 2.3, Zone A (Poisonous Gases). 
Division 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible 
Materials). 
Division 6.1, PGI, Zone A (Poison Liquids). 
Class 2 (Compressed Gases) Including 
Cryogenic Liquids. If your vehicle doesn't have 
racks to hold cylinders, the cargo space floor must 
be flat. The cylinders must be: 
Held upright. 
In racks attached to the vehicle or in boxes that will 
keep them from turning over. 
Cylinders may be loaded in a horizontal position 
(lying down) if it is designed so the relief valve is in 
the vapor space. 
Division 2.3 (Poisonous Gas) or Division 6.1 
(Poisonous) Materials. Never transport these 
materials in containers with interconnections. Never 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-11  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
load a package labeled POISON or POISON 
INHALATION HAZARD in the driver's cab or 
sleeper or with food material for human or animal 
consumption. There are special rules for loading 
and unloading Class 2 materials in cargo tanks. You 
must have special training to do this. 
Class 7 (Radioactive) Materials. Some packages 
of Class 7 (Radioactive) materials bear a number 
called the "transport index." The shipper labels 
these packages Radioactive II or Radioactive III, 
and prints the package's transport index on the 
label. Radiation surrounds each package, passing 
through all nearby packages. To deal with this 
problem, the number of packages you can load 
together is controlled. Their closeness to people, 
animals, and unexposed film is also controlled. The 
transport index tells the degree of control needed 
during transportation. The total transport index of all 
packages in a single vehicle must not exceed 
50.Table A to this section (49 CFR 177-842) shows 
rules for each transport index. It shows how close 
you can load Class 7 (Radioactive) materials to 
people, animals, or film. For example, you can't 
leave a package with a transport index of 1.1 within 
two feet of people or cargo space walls. 
Do Not Load Table 
Do Not Load 
In The Same Vehicle With 
Division 6.1 or 2.3 
(POISON or poison 
inhalation hazard 
labeled material). 
Animal or human food unless the 
poison package is over packed in 
an approved way. Foodstuffs are 
anything you swallow. However, 
mouthwash, toothpaste, and skin 
creams are not foodstuff.  
Division 2.3 
(Poisonous) gas Zone 
A or Division 6.1 
(Poison) liquids, PGI, 
Zone A. 
Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives, 
Division 5.1 (Oxidizers), Class 3 
(Flammable Liquids), Class 8 
(Corrosive Liquids), Division 5.2 
(Organic Peroxides),  
Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Explosives,  
Division 1.5 (Blasting Agents),  
Division 2.1 (Flammable Gases), 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids). 
Charged storage 
batteries. 
Division 1.1. 
Class 1 (Detonating 
primers). 
Any other explosives unless in 
authorized containers or 
packages. 
Division 6.1 
(Cyanides or cyanide 
mixtures). 
Acids, corrosive materials, or other 
acidic materials which could 
release hydrocyanic acid. 
For Example:  
Cyanides, Inorganic, n.o.s. 
Silver Cyanide 
Sodium Cyanide. 
Nitric acid (Class 8). 
Other materials unless the nitric 
acid is not loaded above any other 
material. 
Figure 9.9 
Mixed loads. The rules require some products to be 
loaded separately. You cannot load them together 
in the same cargo space. Figure 9.9 lists some 
examples. The regulations (the Segregation Table 
for Hazardous Materials) name other materials you 
must keep apart. 
Subsection 9.4 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Around which hazard classes must you 
never smoke? 
Which three hazard classes should not be 
loaded into a trailer that has a heater/air 
conditioner unit? 
Should the floor liner required for Division 
1.1 or 1.2 materials be stainless steel? 
At the shipper’s dock you’re given a paper 
for 100 cartons of battery acid. You already 
have 100 pounds of dry Silver Cyanide on 
board. What precautions do you have to 
take? 
Name a hazard class that uses transport 
indexes to determine the amount that can 
be loaded in a single vehicle. 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 9.4. 
9.5 – Bulk Packaging Marking, Loading 
and Unloading 
The glossary at the end of this section gives the 
meaning of the word bulk. Cargo tanks are bulk 
packaging permanently attached to a vehicle. Cargo 
tanks remain on the vehicle when you load and 
unload them. Portable tanks are bulk packaging, 
which are not permanently attached to a vehicle. 
The product is loaded or unloaded while the 
portable tanks are off the vehicle. Portable tanks are 
then put on a vehicle for transportation. There are 
many types of cargo tanks in use. The most 
common cargo tanks are MC306 for liquids and 
MC331 for gases. 
9.5.1 – Markings 
You must display the identification number of the 
hazardous materials in portable tanks and cargo 
tanks and other bulk packaging (such as dump 
trucks). Identification numbers are in column 4 of the 
Hazardous Materials Table. The rules require black 
100 mm (3.9 inch) numbers on orange panels, 
placards, or a white, diamond-shaped background if 
no placards are required. Specification cargo tanks 
must show re-test date markings. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-12  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Portable tanks must also show the lessee or 
owner's name. They must also display the shipping 
name of the contents on two opposing sides. The 
letters of the shipping name must be at least two 
inches tall on portable tanks with capacities of more 
than 1,000 gallons and one-inch tall on portable 
tanks with capacities of less than 1,000 gallons. The 
identification number must appear on each side and 
each end of a portable tank or other bulk packaging 
that hold 1,000 gallons or more and on two opposing 
sides, if the portable tank holds less than 1,000 
gallons. The identification numbers must still be 
visible when the portable tank is on the motor 
vehicle. If they are not visible, you must display the 
identification number on both sides and ends of the 
motor vehicle. 
Intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) are bulk 
packages, but are not required to have the owner’s 
name or shipping name. 
9.5.2 – Tank Loading 
The person in charge of loading and unloading a 
cargo tank must be sure a qualified person is always 
watching. This person watching the loading or 
unloading must: 
Be alert. 
Have a clear view of the cargo tank. 
Be within 25 feet of the tank. 
Know of the hazards of the materials involved. 
Know the procedures to follow in an emergency. 
Be authorized to move the cargo tank and able to 
do so. 
There are special attendance rules for cargo tanks 
transporting propane and anhydrous ammonia. 
Close all manholes and valves before moving a tank 
of hazardous materials, no matter how small the 
amount in the tank or how short the distance. 
Manholes and valves must be closed to prevent 
leaks. It is illegal to move a cargo tank with open 
valves or covers unless it is empty according to 49 
CFR 173.29. 
9.5.3 – Flammable Liquids 
Turn off your engine before loading or unloading 
any flammable liquids. Only run the engine if 
needed to operate a pump. Ground a cargo tank 
correctly before filling it through an open filling hole. 
Ground the tank before opening the filling hole, and 
maintain the ground until after closing the filling 
hole. 
9.5.4 – Compressed Gas 
Keep liquid discharge valves on a compressed gas 
tank closed except when loading and unloading. 
Unless your engine runs a pump for product 
transfer, turn it off when loading or unloading. If you 
use the engine, turn it off after product transfer, 
before you unhook the hose. Unhook all 
loading/unloading connections before coupling, 
uncoupling, or moving a cargo tank. Always chock 
trailers and semi-trailers to prevent motion when 
uncoupled from the power unit. 
Subsection 9.5 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. What are cargo tanks? 
2. How is a portable tank different from a cargo 
tank? 
3. Your engine runs a pump used during delivery 
of compressed gas. Should you turn off the 
engine before or after unhooking hoses after 
delivery? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsection 9.5. 
9.6 – Hazardous Materials -- Driving 
and Parking Rules 
9.6.1 – Parking with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 
Explosives  
Never park with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives 
within five feet of the traveled part of the road. 
Except for short periods of time needed for vehicle 
operation necessities (e.g., fueling), do not park 
within 300 feet of: 
A bridge, tunnel, or building. 
A place where people gather.  
An open fire. 
If you must park to do your job, do so only briefly. 
Don't park on private property unless the owner is 
aware of the danger. Someone must always watch 
the parked vehicle. You may let someone else 
watch it for you only if your vehicle is: 
On the shipper's property. 
On the carrier's property. 
On the consignee's property. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-13  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
You are allowed to leave your vehicle unattended in 
a safe haven. A safe haven is an approved place for 
parking unattended vehicles loaded with explosives. 
Designation of authorized safe havens is usually 
made by local authorities. 
9.6.2 – Parking a Placarded Vehicle Not 
Transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3) 
Explosives 
You may park a placarded vehicle (not laden with 
explosives) within five feet of the traveled part of the 
road only if your work requires it. Do so only briefly. 
Someone must always watch the vehicle when 
parked on a public roadway or shoulder. Do not 
uncouple a trailer and leave it with hazardous 
materials on a public street. Do not park within 300 
feet of an open fire. 
9.6.3 – Attending Parked Vehicles 
The person attending a placarded vehicle must: 
Be in the vehicle, awake, and not in the sleeper 
berth, or within 100 feet of the vehicle and have it 
within clear view. 
Be aware of the hazards of the materials being 
transported. 
Know what to do in emergencies. 
Be able to move the vehicle, if needed. 
9.6.4 – No Flares! 
You might break down and have to use stopped 
vehicle signals. Use reflective triangles or red 
electric lights. Never use burning signals, such as 
flares or fuses, around a: 
Tank used for Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) or 
Division 2.1 (Flammable Gas) whether loaded or 
empty. 
Vehicle loaded with Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 
Explosives. 
9.6.5 – Route Restrictions 
Some states and counties require permits to 
transport hazardous materials or wastes. They may 
limit the routes you can use. Local rules about 
routes and permits change often. It is your job as 
driver to find out if you need permits or must use 
special routes. Make sure you have all needed 
papers before starting. 
If you work for a carrier, ask your dispatcher about 
route restrictions or permits. If you are an 
independent trucker and are planning a new route, 
check with state agencies where you plan to travel. 
Some localities prohibit transportation of hazardous 
materials through tunnels, over bridges, or other 
roadways. Always check before you start. 
Whenever placarded, avoid heavily populated 
areas, crowds, tunnels, narrow streets, and alleys. 
Take other routes, even if inconvenient, unless 
there is no other way. Never drive a placarded 
vehicle near open fires unless you can safely pass 
without stopping. 
If transporting Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives, 
you must have a written route plan and follow that 
plan. Carriers prepare the route plan in advance and 
give the driver a copy. You may plan the route 
yourself if you pick up the explosives at a location 
other than your employer's terminal. Write out the 
plan in advance. Keep a copy of it with you while 
transporting the explosives. Deliver shipments of 
explosives only to authorized persons or leave them 
in locked rooms designed for explosives storage. 
A carrier must choose the safest route to transport 
placarded radioactive materials. After choosing the 
route, the carrier must tell the driver about the 
radioactive materials, and show the route plan.  
9.6.6 – No Smoking 
Do not smoke within 25 feet of a placarded cargo 
tank used for Class 3 (flammable liquids) or Division 
2.1 (gases). Also, do not smoke or carry a lighted 
cigarette, cigar, or pipe within 25 feet of any vehicle, 
which contains: 
Class 1 (Explosives) 
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids) 
Class 4.1 (Flammable Solids)  
Class 4.2 (Spontaneously Combustible)  
Class 5 (Oxidizers) 
9.6.7 – Refuel with Engine Off 
Turn off your engine before fueling a motor vehicle 
containing hazardous materials. Someone must 
always be at the nozzle, controlling fuel flow. 
9.6.8 – 10 B C Fire Extinguisher 
The power unit of placarded vehicles must have a 
fire extinguisher with a UL rating of 10 B:C or more. 
9.6.9 – Check Tires  
Make sure your tires are properly inflated.  
You must examine each tire on a motor vehicle at 
the beginning of each trip and each time the 
vehicle is parked. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-14  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
The only acceptable way to check tire pressure is to 
use a tire pressure gauge. 
Do not drive with a tire that is leaking or flat except 
to the nearest safe place to fix it. Remove any 
overheated tire. Place it a safe distance from your 
vehicle. Don't drive until you correct the cause of the 
overheating. Remember to follow the rules about 
parking and attending placarded vehicles. They 
apply even when checking, repairing, or replacing 
tires. 
9.6.10 – Where to Keep Shipping Papers and 
Emergency Response Information 
Do not accept a hazardous materials shipment 
without a properly prepared shipping paper. A 
shipping paper for hazardous materials must always 
be easily recognized. Other people must be able to 
find it quickly after a crash. 
Clearly distinguish hazardous materials shipping 
papers from others by tabbing them or keeping 
them on top of the stack of papers. 
When you are behind the wheel, keep shipping 
papers within your reach (with your seat belt on), 
or in a pouch on the driver's door. They must be 
easily seen by someone entering the cab. 
When not behind the wheel, leave shipping papers 
in the driver's door pouch or on the driver's seat. 
Emergency response information must be kept in 
the same location as the shipping paper. 
Papers for Division 1.1, 1.2 or, 1.3 Explosives. 
A carrier must give each driver transporting Division 
1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives a copy of Federal Motor 
Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR), Part 397. The 
carrier must also give written instructions on what to 
do if delayed or in an accident. The written 
instructions must include: 
The names and telephone numbers of people to 
contact (including carrier agents or shippers). 
The nature of the explosives transported. 
The precautions to take in emergencies such as 
fires, accidents, or leaks. 
Drivers must sign a receipt for these documents. 
You must be familiar with, and have in your 
possession while driving, the: 
Shipping papers. 
Written emergency instructions. 
Written route plan. 
A copy of FMCSR, Part 397. 
9.6.11 – Equipment for Chlorine 
A driver transporting chlorine in cargo tanks must 
have an approved gas mask in the vehicle. The 
driver must also have an emergency kit for 
controlling leaks in dome cover plate fittings on the 
cargo tank. 
9.6.12 – Stop before Railroad Crossings 
Stop before a railroad crossing if your vehicle: 
Is placarded. 
Carries any amount of chlorine. 
Has cargo tanks, whether loaded or empty used for 
hazardous materials. 
You must stop 15 to 50 feet before the nearest rail. 
Proceed only when you are sure no train is coming 
and you can clear the tracks without stopping. Don't 
shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
9.7 – Hazardous Materials 
Emergencies 
9.7.1 – Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG) 
The Department of Transportation has a guidebook 
for firefighters, police, and industry workers on how 
to protect themselves and the public from 
hazardous materials. The guide is indexed by 
proper shipping name and hazardous materials 
identification number. Emergency personnel look 
for these things on the shipping paper. That is why 
it is vital that the proper shipping name, identification 
number, label, and placards are correct. 
9.7.2 – Crashes/Incidents 
As a professional driver, your job at the scene of a 
crash or an incident is to: 
Keep people away from the scene. 
Limit the spread of material, only if you can safely 
do so. 
Communicate the danger of the hazardous 
materials to emergency response personnel. 
Provide emergency responders with the shipping 
papers and emergency response information. 
Follow this checklist: 
Check to see that your driving partner is OK. 
Keep shipping papers with you. 
Keep people far away and upwind. 
Warn others of the danger. 
Call for help. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-15  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Follow your employer's instructions. 
9.7.3 – Fires 
You might have to control minor truck fires on the 
road. However, unless you have the training and 
equipment to do so safely, don't fight hazardous 
materials fires. Dealing with hazardous materials 
fires requires special training and protective gear. 
When you discover a fire, call for help. You may use 
the fire extinguisher to keep minor truck fires from 
spreading to cargo before firefighters arrive. Feel 
trailer doors to see if they are hot before opening 
them. If hot, you may have a cargo fire and should 
not open the doors. Opening doors lets air in and 
may make the fire flare up. Without air, many fires 
only smolder until firemen arrive, doing less 
damage. If your cargo is already on fire, it is not safe 
to fight the fire. Keep the shipping papers with you 
to give to emergency personnel as soon as they 
arrive. Warn other people of the danger and keep 
them away. 
If you discover a cargo leak, identify the hazardous 
materials leaking by using shipping papers, labels, 
or package location. Do not touch any leaking 
material--many people injure themselves by 
touching hazardous materials. Do not try to identify 
the material or find the source of a leak by smell. 
Toxic gases can destroy your sense of smell and 
can injure or kill you even if they don't smell. Never 
eat, drink, or smoke around a leak or spill.  
If hazardous materials are spilling from your vehicle, 
do not move it any more than safety requires. You 
may move off the road and away from places where 
people gather, if doing so serves safety. Only move 
your vehicle if you can do so without danger to 
yourself or others. 
Never continue driving with hazardous materials 
leaking from your vehicle in order to find a phone , 
truck stop, help, or similar reason. Remember, the 
carrier pays for the cleanup of contaminated parking 
lots, roadways, and drainage ditches. The costs are 
enormous, so don't leave a lengthy trail of 
contamination. If hazardous materials are spilling 
from your vehicle: 
Park it. 
Secure the area. 
Stay there. 
Call for help or send someone else for help. 
When sending someone for help, give that person: 
A description of the emergency. 
Your exact location and direction of travel. 
Your name, the carrier's name, and the name of 
the community or city where your terminal is 
located. 
The proper shipping name, hazard class, and 
identification number of the hazardous materials, if 
you know them.  
This is a lot for someone to remember. It is a good 
idea to write it all down for the person you send for 
help. The emergency response team must know 
these things to find you and to handle the 
emergency. They may have to travel miles to get to 
you. This information will help them to bring the right 
equipment the first time, without having to go back 
for it. 
Never move your vehicle, if doing so will cause 
contamination or damage the vehicle. Keep upwind 
and away from roadside rests, truck stops, cafes, 
and businesses. Never try to repack leaking 
containers. Unless you have the training and 
equipment to repair leaks safely, don't try it. Call 
your dispatcher or supervisor for instructions and, if 
needed, emergency personnel. 
9.7.4 – Responses to Specific Hazards 
Class 1 (Explosives). If your vehicle has a 
breakdown or accident while carrying explosives, 
warn others of the danger. Keep bystanders away. 
Do not allow smoking or open fire near the vehicle. 
If there is a fire, warn every one of the danger of 
explosion. 
Remove all explosives before separating vehicles 
involved in a collision. Place the explosives at least 
200 feet from the vehicles and occupied buildings. 
Stay a safe distance away. 
Class 2 (Compressed Gases). If compressed gas 
is leaking from your vehicle, warn others of the 
danger. Only permit those involved in removing the 
hazard or wreckage to get close. You must notify 
the shipper if compressed gas is involved in any 
accident. 
Unless you are fueling machinery used in road 
construction or maintenance, do not transfer a 
flammable compressed gas from one tank to 
another on any public roadway. 
Class 3 (Flammable Liquids). If you are 
transporting a flammable liquid and have an 
accident or your vehicle breaks down, prevent 
bystanders from gathering. Warn people of the 
danger. Keep them from smoking. 
Never transport a leaking cargo tank farther than 
needed to reach a safe place. Get off the roadway 
if you can do so safely. Don't transfer flammable 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-16  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
liquid from one vehicle to another on a public 
roadway except in an emergency. 
Class 4 (Flammable Solids) and Class 5 
(Oxidizing Materials). If a flammable solid or 
oxidizing material spills, warn others of the fire 
hazard. Do not open smoldering packages of 
flammable solids. Remove them from the vehicle if 
you can safely do so. Also, remove unbroken 
packages if it will decrease the fire hazard. 
Class 6 (Poisonous Materials and Infectious 
Substances). It is your job to protect yourself, other 
people, and property from harm. Remember that 
many products classed as poison are also 
flammable. If you think a Division 2.3 (Poison 
Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poison Materials) might be 
flammable, take the added precautions needed for 
flammable liquids or gases. Do not allow smoking, 
open flame, or welding. Warn others of the hazards 
of fire, of inhaling vapors, or coming in contact with 
the poison. 
A vehicle involved in a leak of Division 2.3 (Poison 
Gases) or Division 6.1 (Poisons) must be checked 
for stray poison before being used again.  
If a Division 6.2 (Infectious Substances) package is 
damaged in handling or transportation, you should 
immediately contact your supervisor. Packages that 
appear to be damaged or show signs of leakage 
should not be accepted. 
Class 7 (Radioactive Materials). If radioactive 
material is involved in a leak or broken package, tell 
your dispatcher or supervisor as soon as possible. 
If there is a spill, or if an internal container might be 
damaged, do not touch or inhale the material. Do 
not use the vehicle until it is cleaned and checked 
with a survey meter. 
Class 8 (Corrosive Materials). If corrosives spill or 
leak during transportation, be careful to avoid 
further damage or injury when handling the 
containers. Parts of the vehicle exposed to a 
corrosive liquid must be thoroughly washed with 
water. After unloading, wash out the interior as soon 
as possible before reloading. 
If continuing to transport a leaking tank would be 
unsafe, get off the road. If safe to do so, contain any 
liquid leaking from the vehicle. Keep bystanders 
away from the liquid and its fumes. Do everything 
possible to prevent injury to yourself and to others. 
9.7.5 – Required Notification 
The National Response Center helps coordinate 
emergency response to chemical hazards. It is a 
resource to the police and firefighters. It maintains a 
24-hour toll-free line listed below. You or your 
employer must phone when any of the following 
occur as a direct result of a hazardous materials 
incident: 
A person is killed. 
An injured person requires hospitalization. 
Estimated property damage exceeds $50,000. 
The general public is evacuated for more than one 
hour. 
One or more major transportation arteries or 
facilities are closed for one hour or more. 
Fire, breakage, spillage, or suspected radioactive 
contamination occurs. 
Fire, breakage, spillage or suspected 
contamination occur involving shipment of 
infectious substance(s) (bacteria or toxins). 
The release of a marine pollutant in a quantity 
greater than 119 gallons for a liquid or 882 pounds 
for a solid; or a situation exists of such a nature 
(e.g., continuing danger to life exists at the scene 
of an incident) that, in the judgment of the carrier, 
should be reported. 
National Response Center 
(800) 424-8802 
Persons telephoning the National Response Center 
should be ready to give: 
Their name. 
Name and address of the carrier they work for. 
Phone number where they can be reached. 
Date, time, and location of incident. 
The extent of injuries, if any. 
Classification, name, and quantity of hazardous 
materials involved, if such information is available. 
Type of incident and nature of hazardous materials 
involvement and whether a continuing danger to 
life exists at the scene. 
If a reportable quantity of hazardous substance was 
involved, the caller should give the name of the 
shipper and the quantity of the hazardous 
substance discharged. 
Be prepared to give your employer the required 
information as well. Carriers must make detailed 
written reports within 30 days of an incident. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-17  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-18  
Version: July 2022 
CHEMTREC 
(800) 424-9300 
The Chemical Transportation Emergency Center 
(CHEMTREC) in Washington also has a 24-hour 
toll-free line. CHEMTREC was created to provide 
emergency personnel with technical information 
about the physical properties of hazardous 
materials. The National Response Center and 
CHEMTREC are in close communication. If you call 
either one, they will tell the other about the problem 
when appropriate. 
Do not leave radioactive yellow - II or yellow - III 
labeled packages near people, animals, or film 
longer than shown in Figure 9.10 
 
Figure 9.10 
 
 
Classes of Hazardous Materials 
Hazardous materials are categorized into nine 
major hazard classes and additional categories for 
consumer commodities and combustible liquids. 
The classes of hazardous materials are listed in 
Figure 9.11. 
 
Hazard Class Definitions 
Table B 
Class Class Name Example 
1 Explosives 
Ammunition, 
Dynamite, 
Fireworks 
2 Gases Propane, 
Oxygen, Helium 
3 Flammable  Gasoline, 
Acetone 
4 Flammable 
Solids Matches, Fuses 
5 Oxidizers 
Ammonium 
Nitrate, Hydrogen 
Peroxide 
6 Poisons Pesticides, 
Arsenic 
7 Radioactive Uranium, 
Plutonium 
8 Corrosives 
Hydrochloric 
Acid, Battery 
Fluid 
9 
Miscellaneous 
Hazardous 
Materials 
Formaldehyde, 
Asbestos 
None 
ORM-D (Other 
Regulated 
Material
Domestic) 
Hair Spray or 
Charcoal 
None Combustible 
Liquids 
Fuel Oils, Lighter 
Fluid 
Figure 9.11 
 
 
Subsections 9.6 and 9.7 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. If your placarded trailer has dual tires, how 
often should you check the tires? 
2. What is a safe haven? 
3. How close to the traveled part of the roadway 
can you park with Division 1.2 or 1.3 
materials? 
4. How close can you park to a bridge, tunnel, or 
building with the same load? 
5. What type of fire extinguisher must placarded 
vehicles carry? 
6. You’re hauling 100 pounds of Division 4.3 
(dangerous when wet) materials. Do you 
need to stop before a railroad-highway 
crossing? 
7. At a rest area you discover your hazardous 
materials shipments slowly leaking from the 
vehicle. There is no phone around. What 
should you do? 
Radioactive Separation  
Table A 
TOTAL TRANSPORT 
INDEX 
MINIMUM DISTANCE IN FEET TO 
NEAREST UNDEVELOPED FILM 
TO PEOPLE OR CARGO 
COMPARTMENT 
PARTITIONS 
0-2 
Hrs. 
2-4 
Hrs. 
4-8 
Hrs. 
8-12 
Hrs. 
Over 12 
Hrs. 
None 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0.1 to 
1.0 1 2 3 4 5 1 
1.1 to 
5.0 3 4 6 8 11 2 
5.1 to 
10.0 4 6 9 11 15 3 
10.1 to 
20.0 5 8 12 16 22 4 
20.1 to 
30.0 7 10 15 20 29 5 
30.1 to 
40.0 8 11 17 22 33 6 
40.1 to 
50.0 9 12 19 24 36  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
8. 
What is the Emergency Response Guide 
(ERG)? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read subsections 9.6 and 9.7. 
9.8 – Hazardous Materials Glossary 
This glossary presents definitions of certain terms 
used in this section. A complete glossary of terms 
can be found in the federal Hazardous Materials 
Rules (49 CFR 171.8). You should have an up-to
date copy of these rules for your reference. 
(Note: You will not be tested on this glossary.) 
Sec. 171.8 Definitions and abbreviations. 
Bulk packaging – Packaging, other than a vessel, 
or a barge, including a transport vehicle or freight 
container, in which hazardous materials are loaded 
with no intermediate form of containment and which 
has: 
A maximum capacity greater than 450 L (119 
gallons) as a receptacle for a liquid; 
A maximum net mass greater than 400 kg (882 
pounds) or a maximum capacity greater than 450 L 
(119 gallons) as a receptacle for a solid; or 
A water capacity greater than 454 kg (1000 pounds) 
as a receptacle for a gas as defined in Sec. 173.115. 
Cargo tank - A bulk packaging which: 
Is a tank intended primarily for the carriage of liquids 
or
 gases
 and 
includes 
appurtenances, 
reinforcements, fittings, and closures (for "tank", 
see 49 CFR 178.345-1(c), 178.337-1, or 178.338-1, 
as applicable); 
Is permanently attached to or forms a part of a motor 
vehicle, or is not permanently attached to a motor 
vehicle but which, by reason of its size, construction, 
or attachment to a motor vehicle is loaded or 
unloaded without being removed from the motor 
vehicle; and 
Is not fabricated under a specification for cylinders, 
portable tanks, tank cars, or multi-unit tank car 
tanks. 
Carrier – A person who transports passengers or 
property in commerce by rail car, aircraft, motor 
vehicle or vessel. 
Consignee – The business or person to whom a 
shipment is delivered. 
Division – A subdivision of a hazard class. 
EPA – U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
FMCSR – The Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Regulations. 
Freight container – a reusable container having a 
volume of 64 cubic feet or more, designed and 
constructed to permit being lifted with its contents 
intact and intended primarily for containment of 
packages (in unit form) during transportation. 
Fuel tank – A tank, other than a cargo tank, used to 
transport flammable or combustible liquid or 
compressed gas for the purpose of supplying fuel 
for propulsion of the transport vehicle to which it is 
attached, or for the operation of other equipment on 
the transport vehicle. 
Gross weight or gross mass – The weight of the 
packaging plus the weight of its contents. 
Hazard class – The category of hazard assigned to 
a hazardous material under the definitional criteria 
of Part 173 and the provisions of the Sec. 172.101 
Table. A material may meet the defining criteria for 
more than one hazard class but is assigned to only 
one hazard class. 
Hazardous materials – A substance or material 
which has been determined by the Secretary of 
Transportation to be capable of posing an 
unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property 
when transported in commerce, and which has 
been so designated. The term includes hazardous 
substances, hazardous wastes, marine pollutants, 
elevated temperature materials and materials 
designated as hazardous in the hazardous 
materials table of §172.101, and materials that meet 
the defining criteria for hazard classes and divisions 
in §173, subchapter c of this chapter. 
Hazardous substance - A material, including its 
mixtures and solutions, that: 
Is listed in Appendix A to Sec. 172.101; 
Is in a quantity, in one package, which equals or 
exceeds the reportable quantity (RQ) listed in 
Appendix A to Sec. 172.101; and 
When in a mixture or solution - 
For radionuclides, conforms to paragraph 7 of 
Appendix A to Sec. 172.101. 
For other than radionuclides, is in a concentration 
by weight which equals or exceeds the 
concentration corresponding to the RQ of the 
material, as shown in Figure 9.12. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-19  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Hazardous Substance Concentrations 
RQ Pounds 
(Kilograms 
Concentration by Weight 
Percent 
PPM 
10 
5,000 
(2,270) 
100,000 
1,000 (454) 
2 
100 (45.4) 
20,000 
.2 
10 (4.54) 
2,000 
.02 
1 (0.454) 
200 
.002 
20 
Figure 9.12 
This definition does not apply to petroleum products 
that are lubricants or fuels (see 40 CFR 300.6). 
Hazardous waste – Any material that is subject to 
the Hazardous Waste Manifest Requirements of the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency specified in 
40 CFR Part 262. 
Intermediate bulk container (IBC) – A rigid or 
flexible portable packaging, other than a cylinder or 
portable tank, which is designed for mechanical 
handling. Standards for IBCs manufactured in the 
United States are set forth in subparts N and O Part 
178. 
Limited quantity – The maximum amount of a 
hazardous material for which there may be specific 
labeling or packaging exception. 
Marking – The descriptive name, identification 
number,
 instructions,
 cautions,
 weight, 
specification, or UN marks or combinations thereof, 
required by this subchapter on outer packaging of 
hazardous materials. 
Mixture – A material composed of more than one 
chemical compound or element. 
Name of contents – The proper shipping name as 
specified in Sec. 172.101. 
Non-bulk packaging - A packaging, which has: 
A maximum capacity of 450 L (119 gallons) as a 
receptacle for a liquid; 
A maximum net mass less than 400 kg (882 
pounds) and a maximum capacity of 450 L (119 
gallons) or less as a receptacle for a solid;  
A water capacity greater than 454 kg (1,000 
pounds) or less as a receptacle for a gas as defined 
in Sec. 173.115;  
Regardless of the definition of bulk packaging, a 
mazimum net mass of 400 kg (882 pounds) or less 
for a bag or box conforming to the applicable 
requirements for specification packagings, including 
the maximum net mass limitations, provided in 
subpart L of Part 178. 
N.O.S. - Not otherwise specified.  
Outage or ullage – The amount by which a 
packaging falls short of being liquid full, usually 
expressed in percent by volume. 
Portable tank – Bulk packaging (except a cylinder 
having a water capacity of 1,000 pounds or less) 
designed primarily to be loaded onto, or on, or 
temporarily attached to a transport vehicle or ship 
and equipped with skids, mountings, or accessories 
to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical 
means. It does not include a cargo tank, tank car, 
multi-unit tank car tank, or trailer carrying 3AX, 
3AAX, or 3T cylinders. 
Proper shipping name – The name of the 
hazardous materials shown in Roman print (not 
italics) in Sec. 172.101. 
P.s.i. or psi – Pounds per square inch. 
P.s.i.a. or psia – Pounds per square inch absolute. 
Reportable quantity (RQ) - The quantity specified 
in Column 2 of the Appendix to Sec. 172.101 for any 
material identified in Column 1 of the Appendix. 
PHMSA – The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration, U.S. Department of 
Transportation, Washington, DC 20590. 
Shipper's certification – A statement on a shipping 
paper, signed by the shipper, saying he/she 
prepared the shipment properly according to law.  
For example: 
"This is to certify that the above named materials 
are properly classified, described, packaged, 
marked and labeled, and are in proper condition for 
transportation 
according to the applicable 
regulations or the Department of Transportation."; 
or  
I
 hereby declare that the contents of this 
consignment are fully and accurately described 
above by the proper shipping name and are 
classified,
 packaged,
 marked and 
labeled/placarded, and are in all respects in proper 
condition for transport according to applicable 
international and national government regulations." 
Shipping paper – A shipping order, bill of lading, 
manifest, or other shipping document serving a 
similar purpose prepared in accordance with 
subpart C of Part 172. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-20  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Technical name – A recognized chemical name or 
microbiological name currently used in scientific and 
technical handbooks, journals, and texts. 
Transport vehicle – A cargo-carrying vehicle such 
as an automobile, van, tractor, truck, semi-trailer, 
tank car, or rail car used for the transportation of 
cargo by any mode. Each cargo-carrying body 
(trailer, rail car, etc.) is a separate transport vehicle. 
UN standard packaging – A specification 
packaging conforming to the standards in the UN 
recommendations. 
UN – United Nations. 
Section 9 - Hazardous Material 
Page 9-21  
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 9 - Hazardous Material Page 9-22  
Version: July 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 10  
SCHOOL BUSES 
This Section Covers 
• Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors 
• Loading and Unloading 
• Emergency Exit and Evacuation 
• Railroad-highway Grade Crossings 
• Student Management 
• Antilock Braking Systems 
• Special Safety Considerations 
Because state and local laws and regulations 
regulate so much of school transportation and 
school bus operations, many of the procedures in 
this section may differ from state to state. You 
should be thoroughly familiar with the laws and 
regulations in your state and local school district. 
10.1 – Danger Zones and Use of Mirrors 
10.1.1 – Danger Zones 
The danger zone is the area on all sides of the bus 
where children are in the most danger of being hit, 
either by another vehicle or their own bus. The 
danger zones may extend as much as 30 feet from 
the front bumper with the first 10 feet being the most 
dangerous, 10 feet from the left and right sides of 
the bus and 10 feet behind the rear bumper of the 
school bus. In addition, the area to the left of the bus 
is always considered dangerous because of 
passing cars. Figure 10.1 illustrates these danger 
zones. 
10.1.2 – Correct Mirror Adjustment 
Proper adjustment and use of all mirrors is vital to 
the safe operation of the school bus in order to 
observe the danger zone around the bus and look 
for students, traffic, and other objects in this area. 
You should always check each mirror before 
operating the school bus to obtain maximum 
viewing area. If necessary, have the mirrors 
adjusted. 
Figure 10.1 
10.1.3 – Outside Left and Right Side Flat 
Mirrors 
These mirrors are mounted at the left and right front 
corners of the bus at the side or front of the 
windshield. They are used to monitor traffic, check 
clearances and students on the sides and to the rear 
of the bus. There is a blind spot immediately below 
and in front of each mirror and directly in back of the 
rear bumper. The blind spot behind the bus extends 
5o to 150 feet and could extend up to 400 feet 
depending on the length and width of the bus. 
Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so you 
can see: 
200 feet or 4 bus lengths behind the bus. 
Along the sides of the bus. 
The rear tires touching the ground. 
Figure 10.2 shows how both the outside left and 
right side flat mirrors should be adjusted. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-1 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Figure 10.2 
10.1.4 – Outside Left and Right Side Convex 
Mirrors 
The convex mirrors are located below the outside 
flat mirrors. They are used to monitor the left and 
right sides at a wide angle. They provide a view of 
traffic, clearances, and students at the side of the 
bus. These mirrors present a view of people and 
objects that does not accurately reflect their size 
and distance from the bus. 
You should position these mirrors to see: 
The entire side of the bus up to the mirror mounts. 
Front of the rear tires touching the ground. 
At least one traffic lane on either side of the bus. 
Figure 10.3 shows how both the outside left and 
right side convex mirrors should be adjusted. 
10.1.5 – Outside Left and Right Side Crossover 
Mirrors 
These mirrors are mounted on both left and right 
front corners of the bus. They are used to see the 
front bumper “danger zone” area directly in front of 
the bus that is not visible by direct vision, and to 
view the “danger zone” area to the left side and the  
Figure 10.3 
right side of the bus, including the service door and 
front wheel area. The mirror presents a view of 
people and objects that does not accurately reflect 
their size and distance from the bus. The driver must 
ensure that these mirrors are properly adjusted. 
Ensure that the mirrors are properly adjusted so you 
can see: 
The entire area in front of the bus from the front 
bumper at ground level to a point where direct 
vision is possible. Direct vision and mirror view 
vision should overlap. 
The right and left front tires touching the ground. 
The area from the front of the bus to the service 
door. 
These mirrors, along with the convex and flat 
mirrors, should be viewed in a logical sequence to 
ensure that a child or object is not in any of the 
danger zones. 
Figure 10.4 illustrates how the left and right side 
crossover mirrors should be adjusted. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-2 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Figure 10.4 
10.1.6 – Overhead Inside Rearview Mirror 
This mirror is mounted directly above the windshield 
on the driver’s side area of the bus. This mirror is 
used to monitor passenger activity inside the bus. It 
may provide limited visibility directly in back of the 
bus if the bus is equipped with a glass-bottomed 
rear emergency door. There is a blind spot area 
directly behind the driver’s seat as well as a large 
blind spot area that begins at the rear bumper and 
could extend up to 400 feet or more behind the bus. 
You must use the exterior side mirrors to monitor 
traffic that approaches and enters this area. 
You should position the mirror to see: 
The top of the rear window in the top of the mirror. 
All of the students, including the heads of the 
students right behind you. 
10.2 – Loading and Unloading 
More students are killed while getting on or off a 
school bus each year than are killed as passengers 
inside of a school bus. As a result, knowing what to 
do before, during, and after loading or unloading 
students is critical. This section will give you specific 
procedures to help you avoid unsafe conditions 
which could result in injuries and fatalities during 
and after loading and unloading students. 
The information in this section is intended to provide 
a broad overview, but is not a definitive set of 
actions. It is imperative that you learn and obey the 
state laws
 and 
regulations
 governing 
loading/unloading operations in your state. 
10.2.1 – Approaching the Stop 
Each school district establishes official routes and 
official school bus stops. All stops should be 
approved by the school district prior to making the 
stop. You should never change the location of a bus 
stop without written approval from the appropriate 
school district official. 
You must use extreme caution when approaching a 
school bus stop. You are in a very demanding 
situation when entering these areas. It is critical that 
you understand and follow all state and local laws 
and regulations regarding approaching a school bus 
stop. This would involve the proper use of mirrors, 
alternating flashing lights, and when equipped, the 
moveable stop signal arm and crossing control arm. 
When approaching the stop, you should: 
Approach cautiously at a slow rate of speed. 
Look for pedestrians, traffic, or other objects 
before, during, and after coming to a stop. 
Continuously check all mirrors. 
If the school bus is so equipped, activate 
alternating flashing amber warning lights at least 
200 feet or approximately 5-10 seconds before the 
school bus stop or in accordance with state law. 
Turn on right turn signal indicator about 100-300 
feet or approximately 3-5 seconds before pulling 
over. 
Continuously check mirrors to monitor the danger 
zones for students, traffic, and other objects. 
Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled 
portion of the roadway. 
When stopping you should: 
Bring school bus to a full stop with the front 
bumper at least 10 feet away from students at the 
designated stop. This forces the students to walk 
to the bus so you have a better view of their 
movements. 
Place transmission in Park, or if there is no Park 
shift point, in Neutral and set the parking brake at 
each stop. 
Activate alternating red lights when traffic is a safe 
distance from the school bus and ensure stop arm 
is extended. 
Make a final check to see that all traffic has 
stopped before completely opening the door and 
signaling students to approach. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-3 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
10.2.2 – Loading Procedures 
Perform a safe stop as described in subsection 
10.2.1.  
Students should wait in a designated location for 
the school bus, facing the bus as it approaches. 
Students should board the bus only when signaled 
by the driver. 
Monitor all mirrors continuously. 
Count the number of students at the bus stop and 
be sure all board the bus. If possible, know names 
of students at each stop. If there is a student 
missing, ask the other students where the student 
is. 
Have the students board the school bus slowly, in 
single file, and use the handrail. The dome light 
should be on while loading in the dark. 
Wait until students are seated and facing forward 
before moving the bus. 
Check all mirrors. Make certain no one is running 
to catch the bus. 
If you cannot account for a student outside, secure 
the bus, take the key, and check around and 
underneath the bus. 
When all students are accounted for, prepare to 
leave by: 
Closing the door. 
Engaging the transmission. 
Releasing the parking brake. 
Turning off alternating flashing red lights. 
Turning on left turn signal. 
Checking all mirrors again. 
Allowing congested traffic to disperse. 
When it is safe, move the bus to enter traffic flow 
and continue the route. 
The loading procedure is essentially the same 
wherever you load students, but there are slight 
differences. When students are loading at the 
school campus, you should: 
Turn off the ignition switch. 
Remove key if leaving driver’s compartment. 
Position yourself to supervise loading as required 
or recommended by your state or local regulations. 
10.2.3 – Unloading Procedures on the Route 
Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas 
as described in subsection 10.2.1.  
Have the students remain seated until told to exit. 
Check all mirrors.  
Count the number of students while unloading to 
confirm the location of all students before pulling 
away from the stop. 
Tell students to exit the bus and walk at least 10 
feet away from the side of the bus to a position 
where the driver can plainly see all students. 
Check all mirrors again. Make sure no students are 
around or returning to the bus. 
If you cannot account for a student outside the 
bus, secure the bus, and check around and 
underneath the bus. 
When all students are accounted for, prepare to 
leave by: 
Closing the door. 
Engaging transmission. 
Releasing parking brake. 
Turning off alternating flashing red lights. 
Turning on left turn signal. 
Checking all mirrors again. 
Allowing congested traffic to disperse. 
When it is safe, move the bus, enter the traffic flow 
and continue the route. 
Note. If you have missed a student’s unloading stop, 
do not back up. Be sure to follow local procedures. 
Additional Procedures for Students That Must 
Cross the Roadway. You should understand what 
students should do when exiting a school bus and 
crossing the street in front of the bus. In addition, 
the school bus driver should understand that 
students might not always do what they are 
supposed to do. If a student or students must cross 
the roadway, they should follow these procedures: 
Walk approximately 10 feet away from the side of 
the school bus to a position where you can see 
them. 
Walk to a location at least 10 feet in front of the 
right corner of the bumper, but still remaining away 
from the front of the school bus. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-4 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Stop at the right edge of the roadway. You should 
be able to see the student’s feet. 
When students reach the edge of the roadway, they 
should: 
Stop and look in all directions, making sure the 
roadway is clear and is safe. 
Check to see if the red flashing lights on the bus 
are still flashing. 
Wait for your signal before crossing the roadway. 
Upon your signal, the students should: 
Cross far enough in front of the school bus to be in 
your view. 
Stop at the left edge of the school bus, stop, and 
look again for your signal to continue to cross the 
roadway. 
Look for traffic in both directions, making sure 
roadway is clear. 
Proceed across the roadway, continuing to look in 
all directions. 
Note:  The school bus driver should enforce any 
state or local regulations or recommendations 
concerning student actions outside the school bus. 
10.2.4 – Unloading Procedures at School 
State and local laws and regulations regarding 
unloading students at schools, particularly in 
situations where such activities take place in the 
school parking lot or other location that is off the 
traveled roadway, are often different than unloading 
along the school bus route. It is important that the 
school bus driver understands and obeys state and 
local 
laws and regulations. The following 
procedures are meant to be general guidelines. 
When unloading at the school you should follow 
these procedures: 
Perform a safe stop at designated unloading areas 
as described in subsection 10.2.1.  
Secure the bus by: 
Turning off the ignition switch. 
Removing key if leaving driver’s compartment. 
Have the students remain seated until told to exit. 
Position yourself to supervise unloading as 
required or recommended by your state or local 
regulations. 
Have students exit in orderly fashion. 
Observe students as they step from bus to see that 
all move promptly away from the unloading area. 
Walk through the bus and check for 
hiding/sleeping students and items left by students. 
Check all mirrors. Make certain no students are 
returning to the bus. 
If you cannot account for a student outside the bus 
and the bus is secure, check around and 
underneath the bus. 
When all students are accounted for, prepare to 
leave by:  
Closing the door. 
Fastening safety belt. 
Starting engine. 
Engaging the transmission. 
Releasing the parking brake. 
Turning off alternating flashing red lights. 
Turning on left turn signal. 
Checking all mirrors again. 
Allowing congested traffic to disperse. 
When it is safe, pull away from the unloading area. 
10.2.5 – Special Dangers of Loading and 
Unloading 
Dropped or Forgotten Objects. Always focus on 
students as they approach the bus and watch for 
any who disappear from sight. 
Students may drop an object near the bus during 
loading and unloading. Stopping to pick up the 
object, or returning to pick up the object may cause 
the student to disappear from the driver’s sight at a 
very dangerous moment.  
Students should be told to leave any dropped object 
and move to a point of safety out of the danger 
zones and attempt to get the driver’s attention to 
retrieve the object. 
Handrail Hang-ups. Students have been injured or 
killed when clothing, accessories, or even parts of 
their body get caught in the handrail or door as they 
exited the bus. You should closely observe all 
students exiting the bus to confirm that they are in a 
safe location prior to moving the bus. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-5 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
10.2.6 – Post-trip Inspection 
When your route or school activity trip is finished, 
you should conduct a post-trip inspection of the bus. 
You should walk through the bus and around the 
bus looking for the following: 
Articles left on the bus. 
Sleeping students. 
Open windows and doors. 
Mechanical/operational problems with the bus, with 
special attention to items that are unique to school 
buses – mirror systems, flashing warning lamps 
and stop signal arms. 
Damage or vandalism. 
Any problems or special situations should be 
reported immediately to your supervisor or school 
authorities. 
10.3 – Emergency Exit and Evacuation 
An emergency situation can happen to anyone, 
anytime, anywhere. It could be a crash, a stalled 
school bus on a railroad-highway crossing or in a 
high-speed intersection, an electrical fire in the 
engine compartment, a medical emergency to a 
student on the school bus, etc. Knowing what to do 
in an emergency–before, during and after an 
evacuation–can mean the difference between life 
and death.  
10.3.1 – Planning for Emergencies 
Determine Need to Evacuate Bus. The first and 
most important consideration is for you to recognize 
the hazard. If time permits, school bus drivers 
should contact their dispatcher to explain the 
situation before making a decision to evacuate the 
school bus. 
As a general rule, student safety and control is best 
maintained by keeping students on the bus during 
an emergency and/or impending crisis situation, if 
so doing does not expose them to unnecessary risk 
or injury. Remember, the decision to evacuate the 
bus must be a timely one. 
A decision to evacuate should include consideration 
of the following conditions: 
Is there a fire or danger of fire? 
Is there a smell of raw or leaking fuel? 
Is there a chance the bus could be hit by other 
vehicles? 
Is the bus in the path of a sighted tornado or rising 
waters? 
Are there downed power lines? 
Would removing students expose them to 
speeding traffic, severe weather, or a dangerous 
environment such as downed power lines? 
Would moving students complicate injuries such as 
neck and back injuries and fractures? 
Is there a hazardous spill involved? Sometimes, it 
may be safer to remain on the bus and not come in 
contact with the material. 
Mandatory Evacuations. The driver must 
evacuate the bus when: 
The bus is on fire or there is a threat of a fire. 
The bus is stalled on or adjacent to a railroad
highway crossing. 
The position of the bus may change and increase 
the danger. 
There is an imminent danger of collision. 
There is a need to quickly evacuate because of a 
hazardous materials spill. 
10.3.2 – Evacuation Procedures 
Be Prepared and Plan Ahead. When possible, 
assign two responsible, older student assistants to 
each emergency exit. Teach them how to assist the 
other students off the bus. Assign another student 
assistant to lead the students to a “safe place” after 
evacuation. However, you must recognize that there 
may not be older, responsible students on the bus 
at the time of the emergency. Therefore, emergency 
evacuation procedures must be explained to all 
students. This includes knowing how to operate the 
various emergency exits and the importance of 
listening to and following all instructions given by 
you. 
Some tips to determine a safe place: 
A safe place will be at least 100 feet off the road in 
the direction of oncoming traffic. This will keep the 
students from being hit by debris if another vehicle 
collides with the bus. 
Lead students upwind of the bus if fire is present. 
Lead students as far away from railroad tracks as 
possible and in the direction of any oncoming train. 
Lead students upwind of the bus at least 300 feet if 
there is a risk from spilled hazardous materials. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-6 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
If the bus is in the direct path of a sighted tornado 
and evacuation is ordered, escort students to a 
nearby ditch or culvert if shelter in a building is not 
readily available, and direct them to lie face down, 
hands covering their head. They should be far 
enough away so the bus cannot topple on them.  
Avoid areas that are subject to flash floods. 
General Procedures. Determine if evacuation is in 
the best interest of safety.  
Determine the best type of evacuation: 
Front, rear or side door evacuation, or some 
combination of doors. 
Roof or window evacuation. 
Secure the bus by: 
Placing transmission in Park, or if there is no shift 
point, in Neutral. 
Setting parking brakes. 
Shutting off the engine. 
Removing ignition key. 
Activating hazard-warning lights. 
If time allows, notify dispatch office of evacuation 
location, conditions, and type of assistance 
needed. 
Dangle radio microphone or telephone out of 
driver’s window for later use, if operable. 
If no radio, or radio is inoperable, dispatch a 
passing motorist or area resident to call for help. 
As a last resort, dispatch two older, responsible 
students to go for help. 
Order the evacuation. 
Evacuate students from the bus. 
Do not move a student you believe may have 
suffered a neck or spinal injury unless his or her life 
is in immediate danger. 
Special procedures must be used to move neck 
spinal injury victims to prevent further injury. 
Direct a student assistant to lead students to the 
nearest safe place. 
Walk through the bus to ensure no students remain 
on the bus. Retrieve emergency equipment. 
Join waiting students. Account for all students and 
check for their safety. 
Protect the scene. Set out emergency warning 
devices as necessary and appropriate. 
Prepare information for emergency responders. 
10.4 – Railroad-highway Crossings 
10.4.1 – Types of Crossings 
Passive Crossings. This type of crossing does not 
have any type of traffic control device. You must 
stop at these crossings and follow proper 
procedures. However, the decision to proceed rests 
entirely in your hands. Passive crossings require 
you to recognize the crossing, search for any train 
using the tracks and decide if there is sufficient clear 
space to cross safely. Passive crossings have 
yellow circular advance warning signs, pavement 
markings and cross-bucks to assist you in 
recognizing a crossing. 
Active Crossings. This type of crossing has a 
traffic control device installed at the crossing to 
regulate traffic at the crossing. These active devices 
include flashing red lights, with or without bells and 
flashing red lights with bells and gates. 
10.4.2 – Warning Signs and Devices 
Advance Warning Signs. The round, black-on
yellow warning sign is placed ahead of a public 
railroad-highway crossing. The advance warning 
sign tells you to slow down, look and listen for the 
train, and be prepared to stop at the tracks if a train 
is coming. See Figure 10.5. 
Figure 10.5 
Pavement Markings. Pavement markings mean 
the same as the advance warning sign. They consist 
of an “X” with the letters “”RR” and a no-passing 
marking on two-lane roads. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-7 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
There is also a no passing zone sign on two-lane 
roads. There may be a white stop line painted on 
the pavement before the railroad tracks. The front of 
the school bus must remain behind this line while 
stopped at the crossing. See Figure 10.6. 
Figure 10.6 
Cross-buck Signs. This sign marks the crossing. It 
requires you to yield the right-of-way to the train. If 
there is no white line painted on the pavement, you 
must stop the bus before the cross-buck sign. When 
the road crosses over more than one set of tracks, 
a sign below the cross-buck indicates the number of 
tracks. See Figure 10.7. 
Figure 10.7 
Flashing Red Light Signals. At many highway-rail 
grade crossings, the cross-buck sign has flashing 
red lights and bells. When the lights begin to flash, 
stop! A train is approaching. You are required to 
yield the right-of-way to the train. If there is more 
than one track, make sure all tracks are clear before 
crossing. See Figure 10.8. 
Gates. Many railroad-highway crossings have 
gates with flashing red lights and bells. Stop when 
the lights begin to flash and before the gate lowers 
across the road lane. Remain stopped until the 
gates go up and the lights have stopped flashing. 
Proceed when it is safe. If the gate stays down after 
the train passes, do not drive around the gate. 
Instead, call your dispatcher. See Figure 10.8. 
10.4.3 – Recommended Procedures 
Each state has laws and regulations governing how 
school buses must operate at railroad-highway 
crossings. It is important for you to understand and 
obey these state laws and regulations. In general, 
school buses must stop at all crossings, and ensure 
it is safe before proceeding across the tracks. The 
specific procedures required in each state vary. 
Figure 10.8 
A school bus is one of the safest vehicles on the 
highway. However, a school bus does not have the 
slightest edge when involved in a crash with a train. 
Because of a train’s size and weight it cannot stop 
quickly. An emergency escape route does not exist 
for a train. You can prevent school bus/train crashes 
by following these recommended procedures. 
Approaching the Crossing: 
Slow down, including shifting to a lower gear in a 
manual transmission bus, and test your brakes. 
Activate hazard lights approximately 200 feet before 
the crossing. Make sure your intentions are known. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-8 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Scan your surroundings and check for traffic behind 
you.  
Stay to the right of the roadway if possible. 
Choose an escape route in the event of a brake 
failure or problems behind you. 
At the Crossing: 
Stop no closer than 15 feet and no farther than 50 
feet from the nearest rail, where you have the best 
view of the tracks. 
Place the transmission in Park, or if there is no Park 
shift point, in Neutral and press down on the service 
brake or set the parking brakes. 
Turn off all radios and noisy equipment, and silence 
the passengers. 
Open the service door and driver’s window. Look 
and listen for an approaching train. 
Crossing the Track: 
Check the crossing signals again before 
proceeding. 
At a multiple-track crossing, stop only before the first 
set of tracks. When you are sure no train is 
approaching on any track, proceed across all of the 
tracks until you have completely cleared them. 
Cross the tracks in a low gear. Do not change gears 
while crossing. 
If the gate comes down after you have started 
across, drive through it even if it means you will 
break the gate. 
10.4.4 – Special Situations 
Bus Stalls or Trapped on Tracks. If your bus stalls 
or is trapped on the tracks, get everyone out and off 
the tracks immediately. Move everyone far from the 
bus at an angle, which is both away from the tracks 
and toward the train. 
Police Officer at the Crossing. If a police officer is 
at the crossing, obey directions. If there is no police 
officer, and you believe the signal is malfunctioning, 
call your dispatcher to report the situation and ask 
for instructions on how to proceed.  
Obstructed View of Tracks. Plan your route so it 
provides maximum sight distance at highway-rail 
grade crossings. Do not attempt to cross the tracks 
unless you can see far enough down the track to 
know for certain that no trains are approaching. 
Passive crossings are those that do not have any 
type of traffic control device. Be especially careful at 
“passive” crossings. Even if there are active railroad 
signals that indicate the tracks are clear, you must 
look and listen to be sure it is safe to proceed.  
Containment or Storage Areas. If it won’t fit, don’t 
commit! Know the length of your bus and the size of 
the containment area at highway-rail crossings on 
the school bus route, as well as any crossing you 
encounter in the course of a school activity trip. 
When approaching a crossing with a signal or stop 
sign on the opposite side, pay attention to the 
amount of room there. Be certain the bus has 
enough containment or storage area to completely 
clear the railroad tracks on the other side if there is 
a need to stop. As a general rule, add 15 feet to the 
length of the school bus to determine an acceptable 
amount of containment or storage area. 
10.5 – Student Management 
10.5.1 – Don’t Deal with On-bus Problems 
When Loading and Unloading 
In order to get students to and from school safely 
and on time, you need to be able to concentrate on 
the driving task. 
Loading and unloading requires all your 
concentration. Don’t take your eyes off what is 
happening outside the bus. 
If there is a behavior problem on the bus, wait until 
the students unloading are safely off the bus and 
have moved away. If necessary, pull the bus over to 
handle the problem. 
10.5.2 – Handling Serious Problems 
Tips on handling serious problems: 
Follow your school’s procedures for discipline or 
refusal of rights to ride the bus. 
Stop the bus. Park in a safe location off the road, 
perhaps a parking lot or a driveway. 
Secure the bus. Take the ignition key with you if 
you leave your seat. 
Stand up and speak respectfully to the offender or 
offenders. Speak in a courteous manner with a firm 
voice. Remind the offender of the expected 
behavior. Do not show anger, but do show that you 
mean business. 
If a change of seating is needed, request that the 
student move to a seat near you. 
Never put a student off the bus except at school or 
at his or her designated school bus stop. If you feel 
that the offense is serious enough that you cannot 
safely drive the bus, call for a school administrator 
or the police to come and remove the student.  
Always follow your state or local procedures for 
requesting assistance.
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-9 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
10.6 – Antilock Braking Systems 
10.6.1 – Vehicles Required to Have Antilock 
Braking Systems 
The Department of Transportation requires that 
antilock braking systems be on: 
Air brakes vehicles, (trucks, buses, trailers and 
converter dollies) built on or after March 1, 1998. 
Hydraulically braked trucks and buses with a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 10,000 lbs or more built on 
or after March 1, 1999. 
Many buses built before these dates have been 
voluntarily equipped with ABS. 
Your school bus will have a yellow ABS malfunction 
lamp on the instrument panel if it is equipped with 
ABS. 
10.6.2 – How ABS Helps You 
When you brake hard on slippery surfaces in a 
vehicle without ABS, your wheels may lock up. 
When your steering wheels lock up, you lose 
steering control. When your other wheels lock up, 
you may skid or even spin the vehicle. 
ABS helps you avoid wheel lock up and maintain 
control. You may or may not be able to stop faster 
with ABS, but you should be able to steer around an 
obstacle while braking, and avoid skids caused by 
over braking. 
10.6.3 – Braking with ABS 
When you drive a vehicle with ABS, you should 
brake as you always have. In other words: 
Use only the braking force necessary to stop safely 
and stay in control. 
Brake the same way, regardless of whether you 
have ABS on the bus. However, in emergency 
braking, do not pump the brakes on a bus with 
ABS. 
As you slow down, monitor your bus and back off 
the brakes (if it is safe to do so) to stay in control. 
10.6.4 – Braking if ABS is Not Working 
Without ABS, you still have normal brake functions. 
Drive and brake as you always have. 
Vehicles with ABS have yellow malfunction lamps to 
tell you if something is not working. The yellow ABS 
malfunction lamp is on the bus’s instrument panel. 
As a system check on newer vehicles, the 
malfunction lamp comes on at start-up for a bulb 
check and then goes out quickly. On older systems, 
the lamp could stay on until you are driving over five 
mph. 
If the lamp stays on after the bulb check, or goes on 
once you are under way, you may have lost ABS 
control at one or more wheels. 
Remember, if your ABS malfunctions, you still have 
regular brakes. Drive normally, but get the system 
serviced soon. 
10.6.5 – Safety Reminders 
ABS won’t allow you to drive faster, follow more 
closely, or drive less carefully. 
ABS won’t prevent power or turning skids – 
ABS should prevent brake-induced skids but not 
those caused by spinning the drive wheels or 
going too fast in a turn. 
ABS won’t necessarily shorten stopping 
distance. ABS will help maintain vehicle control, 
but not always shorten stopping distance. 
ABS won’t increase or decrease ultimate 
stopping power – ABS is an “add-on” to your 
normal brakes, not a replacement for them. 
ABS won’t change the way you normally brake. 
Under normal brake conditions, your vehicle will 
stop as it always stopped. ABS only comes into 
play when a wheel would normally have locked up 
because of over braking. 
ABS won’t compensate for bad brakes or poor 
brake maintenance. 
Remember: The best vehicle safety feature is still 
a safe driver. 
Remember: Drive so you never need to use your 
ABS. 
Remember: If you need it, ABS could help to 
prevent a serious crash. 
10.7 – Special Safety Considerations 
10.7.1 – Strobe Lights 
Some school buses are equipped with roof
mounted, white strobe lights. If your bus is so 
equipped, the overhead strobe light should be used 
when you have limited visibility. This means that you 
cannot easily see around you – in front, behind, or 
beside the school bus. Your visibility could be only 
slightly limited or it could be so bad that you can see 
nothing at all. In all instances, understand and obey 
your state or local regulations concerning the use of 
these lights. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-10 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
10.7.2 – Driving in High Winds 
Strong winds affect the handling of the school bus! 
The side of a school bus acts like a sail on a 
sailboat. Strong winds can push the school bus 
sideways. They can even move the school bus off 
the road or, in extreme conditions, tip it over. 
If you are caught in strong winds: 
Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel. Try to 
anticipate gusts. 
You should slow down to lessen the effect of the 
wind, or pull off the roadway and wait. 
Contact your dispatcher to get more information on 
how to proceed. 
10.7.3 – Backing 
Backing a school bus is strongly discouraged. You 
should back your bus only when you have no other 
safe way to move the vehicle. You should never 
back a school bus when students are outside of the 
bus. Backing is dangerous and increases your risk 
of a collision. If you have no choice and you must 
back your bus, follow these procedures: 
Post a lookout. The purpose of the lookout is to 
warn you about obstacles, approaching persons, 
and other vehicles. The lookout should not give 
directions on how to back the bus. 
Signal for quiet on the bus. 
Constantly check all mirrors and rear windows. 
Back slowly and smoothly. 
If no lookout is available: 
Set the parking brake. 
Turn off the motor and take the keys with you. 
Walk to the rear of the bus to determine whether the 
way is clear. 
If you must back-up at a student pick-up point, be 
sure to pick up students before backing and watch 
for late comers at all times. 
Be sure that all students are in the bus before 
backing. 
If you must back-up at a student drop-off point, be 
sure to unload students after backing. 
10.7.4 – Tail Swing 
A school bus can have up to a three-foot tail swing. 
You need to check your mirrors before and during 
any turning movements to monitor the tail swing. 
Section 10 
Test Your Knowledge 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Define the danger zone. How far does the 
danger zone extend around the bus? 
What should you be able to see if the 
outside flat mirrors are adjusted properly? 
The outside convex mirrors? The crossover 
mirrors? 
You are loading students along the route. 
When should you activate your alternating 
flashing amber warning lights? 
You are unloading students along your 
route. Where should students walk to after 
exiting the bus? 
After unloading at school, why should you 
walk through the bus? 
What position should students be in front of 
the bus before they cross the roadway?  
Under what conditions must you evacuate 
the bus? 
How far from the nearest rail should you 
stop at a highway-rail crossing? 
What is a passive highway-rail crossing? 
Why should you be extra cautious at this 
type of crossing? 
How should you use your brakes if your 
vehicle is equipped with antilock brakes 
(ABS)? 
These questions may be on your test. If you can’t 
answer them all, re-read Section 10. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-11 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK. 
Section 10 – School Buses 
Page 10-12 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 11  
Vehicle Inspection Test 
This Section Covers 
• Internal Inspection 
• External Inspection 
During the Vehicle inspection, you must show that 
the vehicle is safe to drive. You will have to walk 
around the vehicle, name and point to/ touch each 
item and explain to the examiner what you are 
checking and why.  
Any vehicle that has components marked or labeled 
cannot be used for the Vehicle Inspection test. 
11.1 All Vehicles 
Study the following vehicle parts for the type of 
vehicle you will be using during the CDL skills tests. 
You should be able to identify each part and tell the 
examiner what you are looking for or inspecting. 
11.1.1 Engine Compartment (Engine Off) 
Leaks/Hoses 
Look for puddles on the ground. 
Look for dripping fluids on underside of engine and 
transmission. 
Inspect hoses for condition and leaks. 
Oil Level  
Check oil level when engine is off. 
Indicate where dipstick is located. 
Check that the oil level is within safe operating 
range. Level must be above refill mark. 
Coolant Level 
Looks at sight glass on radiator or coolant reservoir; 
adequate level will show in sight glass. If no sight 
glass is available, you must describe what s/he 
would look for after removing radiator cap. 
Power Steering Fluid 
Checks the dipstick and sees where the fluid level is 
relative to the refill mark or checks sight glass. Level 
must be above refill mark. 
Engine Compartment Belts 
Check the following belts for snugness (1/2 to 3/4 
inch play at center of belt), cracks, frays, loose 
fibers or signs of wear: 
Power steering belt. 
Water pump belt. 
Alternator belt. 
Air compressor belt. 
Note: If any of the components listed above are 
not belt driven, you must: 
Tell the examiner which component(s) are not belt 
driven. 
Make sure component(s) are operating properly, 
are not damaged or leaking, and are mounted 
securely. 
Hydraulic Brakes Master Cylinder & Brake Fluid 
Checks that master cylinder is securely attached 
and not leaking 
Checks the level of brake fluid in the reservoir to 
ensure it is between the add and full marks 
Safe Start  
Place gearshift lever in neutral (or park, for 
automatic transmissions). 
Depress clutch before attempting to start the 
vehicle 
Start the vehicle and keep clutch depressed until 
engine reaches idling speed. 
Then release clutch slowly. 
11.1.2 – Cab Check/Engine Start 
Oil Pressure Gauge 
Make sure oil pressure gauge is working. 
Check that pressure gauge shows increasing or 
normal oil pressure or that the warning light goes 
off. 
If equipped, oil temperature gauge should begin a 
gradual rise to the normal operating range. 
Temperature Gauge 
Make sure the temperature gauge is working. 
Temperature should begin to climb to the normal 
operating range or temperature light should be off. 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-1 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Air Gauge 
Check that the air gauge is working properly and 
that the air compressor builds the air pressure to 
governor cut-out at approximately 120-140 psi or 
as specified by manufacturer.   
Ammeter/Voltmeter 
Check that gauges show alternator and/or 
generator is charging or that warning light is off. 
Mirrors and Windshield 
Mirrors should be clean and adjusted properly from 
the inside. 
Windshield should be clean with no illegal stickers, 
no obstructions, or damage to the glass. 
Emergency Equipment 
Check for spare electrical fuses.  
Check for three red reflective triangles and 6 
fusees or 3 liquid burning flares. 
Check that the fire extinguisher is  properly 
charged and securely mounted. 
Note: If the vehicle is not equipped with electrical 
fuses, you must mention this to the examiner. 
Wipers/Washers 
Check that wiper arms and blades are secure, not 
damaged, and operate smoothly. 
If equipped, windshield washers must operate 
correctly. 
Lights/Reflectors/Reflector Tape Condition 
(Sides & Rear) 
Test that dash indicators work when corresponding 
lights are turned on: 
Left turn signal. 
Right turn signal. 
Four-way emergency flashers. 
High beam headlight.  
Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) indicator. 
Check that all external lights and reflective 
equipment are clean and functional and none or 
broken or missing. Light and reflector checks 
include verification of correct color: 
Clearance lights (red on rear, amber elsewhere). 
Headlights (high and low beams). 
Taillights. 
Backing lights. 
Turn signals. 
Four-way flashers. 
Brake lights. 
Red reflectors (on rear) and amber reflectors 
(elsewhere). 
Reflector tape condition 
Note: Checks of brake, turn signal and four-way 
flasher functions must be done separately. 
Horn 
Check that air horn and/or electric horn work. 
Heater/Defroster 
Test that the heater and defroster work. 
Parking Brake Check 
With air pressure built to governor cutout and the 
parking brake engaged (trailer brakes released on 
combination vehicles), check that the parking brake 
will hold vehicle by gently trying to pull forward with 
parking brake on. 
With air pressure built to governor cutout, the 
parking brake released and the trailer parking 
brake engaged (combination vehicles only), check 
that the trailer parking brake will hold vehicle by 
gently trying to pull forward with the trailer parking 
brake on. 
Hydraulic Brake Check 
Failure to perform both components of the 
hydraulic brake check will result in an automatic 
failure of the vehicle inspection test. 
1. Pump the brake pedal three times, then hold it 
down for five seconds. The brake pedal should 
not move (depress) during the five seconds. 
2. If equipped with a hydraulic brake reserve 
(back-up) system, with the key off, depress the 
brake pedal and listen for the sound of the 
reserve system electric motor. 
3. Check that the warning buzzer or light is off. 
Air Brake Check (Air Brake Equipped Vehicles 
Only) 
Failure to perform all three components of the air 
brake check correctly will result in an automatic 
failure of the vehicle inspection test. Air brake safety 
devices vary. However, this procedure is designed 
to see that any safety device operates correctly as 
air pressure drops from normal to a low air 
condition. For safety purposes, in areas where an 
incline is present, you will use wheel chocks during 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-2 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
the air brake check. The proper procedures for 
inspecting the air brake system are as follows: 
1. With the air pressure built up to governor cutoff 
(120 – 140 psi), shut off the engine leaving  the 
key in the “on” or “battery charge” position, 
chock your wheels if necessary, release the 
parking brake (all vehicles), and the tractor 
protection valve (combination vehicle) and fully 
apply the foot brake.  Hold the foot brake for one 
minute. Check the air gauge to see if the air 
pressure drops more than three pounds in one 
minute (single vehicle) or four pounds in one 
minute (combination vehicle). 
2. Begin fanning off the air pressure by rapidly 
applying and releasing the foot brake. Low air 
warning devices (buzzer, light, flag) should 
activate before air pressure drops below 55 psi 
or level specified by the manufacturer. 
3. Continue to fan off the air pressure. At a range 
between 20 – 45 psi on a tractor-trailer 
combination vehicle (or level specified by the 
manufacturer), the tractor protection valve and 
parking brake valve should close (pop out). On 
other combination vehicle types and single 
vehicle types, the parking brake valve should 
close (pop out). 
Service Brake Check 
You will be required to check the application of air 
or hydraulic service brakes.  This procedure is 
designed to determine that the brakes are working 
correctly and that the vehicle does not pull to one 
side or the other. 
Pull forward at 5 mph, apply the service brake and 
stop.  Check to see that the vehicle does not pull to 
either side and that it stops when brake is applied. 
Safety Belt 
Check that the safety belt is securely mounted, 
adjusts, latches properly and is not ripped or 
frayed. 
11.2 – External Inspection (All Vehicles) 
11.2.1– Steering 
Steering Box/Hoses 
Check that the steering box is securely mounted 
and not leaking. Look for any missing nuts and/or , 
bolts. 
Check for power steering fluid leaks or damage to 
power steering hoses. 
Steering Linkage 
See that connecting links, arms, and rods from the 
steering box to the wheel are not worn or cracked. 
Check that joints and sockets are not worn or loose 
and that there are no missing nuts, bolts, or cotter 
keys. 
11.2.2 – Suspension 
Springs/Air/Torque 
Look for missing, shifted, cracked, or broken leaf 
springs. 
Look for broken or distorted coil springs. 
If vehicle is equipped with torsion bars, torque 
arms, or other types of suspension components, 
check that they are not damaged and are mounted 
securely. 
Air ride suspension should be checked for damage 
and leaks. 
Mounts 
Look for cracked or broken spring hangers, 
missing or damaged bushings, and broken, loose, 
or missing bolts, u-bolts or other axle mounting 
parts. (The mounts should be checked at each 
point where they are secured to the vehicle frame 
and axle[s]). 
Shock Absorbers 
See that shock absorbers are secure and that 
there are no leaks. 
Note: Be prepared to perform the same 
suspension components inspection on every axle 
(power unit and trailer, if equipped). 
11.2.3 – Brakes 
Slack Adjustors and Pushrods 
Look for broken, loose, or missing parts. 
For manual slack adjustors, the brake pushrod 
should not move more than one inch (with the 
brakes released) when pulled by hand. 
Brake Chambers 
See that brake chambers are not leaking, cracked, 
or dented and are mounted securely. There are no 
loose or missing clamps. 
Brake Hoses/Lines 
Look for cracked, worn, or leaking hoses, lines, 
and couplings. 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-3 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Drum Brake 
Check for cracks, dents, or holes. Also check for 
loose or missing bolts. 
Check for contaminates such debris or oil/grease.    
Brake linings (where visible) should not be worn 
dangerously thin. 
Brake Linings 
On some brake drums, there are openings where 
the brake linings can be seen from outside the 
drum. For this type of drum, check that a visible 
amount of brake lining is showing. 
Note: Be prepared to perform the same brake 
components inspection on every axle (power unit 
and trailer, if equipped). 
11.2.4 – Wheels 
Rims 
Check for damaged or bent rims. Rims cannot 
have welding repairs.  Check rims for rust trails 
that may indicate the rim is loose on the wheel. 
Tires 
The following items must be inspected on every 
tire: 
Tread depth: Check for minimum tread depth (4/32 
on steering axle tires, 2/32 on all other tires). 
Tire condition: Check that tread is evenly worn and 
look for cuts or other damage to tread or sidewalls. 
Also, make sure that valve caps and stems are not 
missing, broken, or damaged. 
Tire inflation: Check for proper inflation by using a 
tire gauge.  Note:  You will not get credit if you simply 
kick the tires or use a mallet to check for proper 
inflation. 
Hub Oil Seals/Axle Seals 
See that hub oil/grease seals and axle seals are not 
leaking and, if wheel has a sight glass, oil level is 
adequate. 
Lug Nuts 
Check that all lug nuts are present, free of cracks 
and distortions, and show no signs of looseness 
such as rust trails or shiny threads. 
Make sure all bolt holes are not cracked or distorted. 
Spacers or Budd Spacing 
If equipped, check that spacers are not bent, 
damaged, or rusted through; and are centered with 
dual wheels and tires evenly separated.. 
Check the space between the tires for debris 
and/or foreign objects. 
Note: Be prepared to perform the same wheel 
inspection on every axle (power unit and trailer, if 
equipped). 
11.2.5 – Side of Vehicle 
Door(s)/Mirror(s) 
Check that door(s) are not damaged and that they 
open and close properly from the outside.  
Hinges should be secure with seals intact. 
Check that mirror(s) and mirror brackets are not 
damaged and are mounted securely with no loose 
fittings. 
Fuel Tank 
Check that tank(s) are secure, cap(s) are tight, and 
that there are no leaks from tank(s) or lines. 
Drive Shaft 
See that drive shaft is not bent or cracked. 
Couplings should be secure and free of foreign 
objects. 
Exhaust System 
Check system for damage and signs of leaks such 
as rust or carbon soot.  Exhaust system should not 
have cracks, holes or severe dents 
System should be connected tightly and mounted 
securely. 
If equipped with emissions after-treatment 
equipment: 
Checks DEF tank to ensure the level of diesel 
exhaust fluid in the tank is adequate (more than 
1/8th tank) 
Checks that DEF indicator on the dash is working 
properly  
Frame 
Look for cracks, broken welds, holes or other 
damage to the longitudinal frame members, cross 
members, box, and floor. 
11.2.6 – Rear of Vehicle 
Splash Guards 
If equipped, check that splash guards or mud flaps 
are not damaged and are mounted securely. 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-4 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Doors/Ties/Lifts 
Check that doors and hinges are not damaged and 
that they open, close, and latch properly from the 
outside, if equipped. 
Ties, straps, chains, and binders must also be 
secure. 
If equipped with a cargo lift, look for leaking, 
damaged or missing parts and explain how it 
should be checked for correct operation. 
Lift must be fully retracted and latched securely. 
11.2.7 – Tractor/Coupling 
Air/Electric Lines 
Listen for air leaks. Check that air hoses and 
electrical lines are not cut, chafed, spliced, or worn 
(steel braid should not show through). 
Make sure air and electrical lines are not tangled, 
pinched, or dragging against tractor parts. 
Catwalk/Steps 
Check that the catwalk is solid, clear of objects, 
and securely bolted to tractor frame. 
Check that steps leading to the cab entry and 
catwalk (if equipped) are solid, clear of objects, 
and securely bolted to tractor frame. 
Mounting Bolts 
Look for loose or missing mounting brackets, 
clamps, bolts, or nuts. Both the fifth wheel and the 
slide mounting must be solidly attached. 
Check for loose or missing mounting bolts and for 
broken welds for pintle hook or other type of hitch 
mount, and tongue/draw-bar assembly to ensure 
that they are solidly attached in place. 
On other types of coupling systems (i.e., ball hitch, 
pintle hook, etc.), inspect all coupling components 
and mounting brackets for missing or broken parts. 
Hitch Release Lever 
Check to see that the hitch release lever is in place 
and is secure. 
Locking Jaws 
Look into fifth wheel gap and check that locking 
jaws are fully closed around the kingpin. 
On other types of coupling systems (i.e., ball hitch, 
pintle hook, etc.), inspect the locking mechanism 
for missing or broken parts and make sure it is 
locked securely. If present, safety cables or chains 
must be secure and free of kinks and excessive 
slack. 
5th Wheel Skid Plate 
Check for proper lubrication and that 5th wheel skid 
plate is securely mounted to the platform and that 
all bolts and pins are secure and not missing. 
Platform (Fifth Wheel) 
Check for cracks or breaks in the platform structure 
which supports the fifth wheel skid plate. 
Release Arm (Fifth Wheel) 
If equipped, make sure the release arm is in the 
engaged position and the safety latch is in place. 
Kingpin/Apron/Gap 
Explain that locking jaws holds kingpin in place 
and that the kingpin is not bent or damaged 
Make sure the visible part of the apron is not bent, 
cracked, or broken. 
Check that the trailer is lying flat on the fifth wheel 
skid plate (no gap). 
Check for kingpin lock. 
Locking Pins (Fifth Wheel) 
If equipped, look for loose or missing pins in the 
slide mechanism of the sliding fifth wheel. If air 
powered, check for leaks. 
Make sure locking pins are fully engaged. 
Check that the fifth wheel is positioned properly so 
that the tractor frame will clear the landing gear 
during turns. 
Sliding Pintle 
Check the sliding pintle hook for excessive wear 
and to ensure it is secure with no loose or missing 
nuts or bolts and cotter pin is in place. 
Tongue or Draw-bar 
Check that the tongue/draw-bar is not bent or 
twisted and checks for broken welds and stress 
cracks. 
Check that the tongue/draw-bar eye is not worn 
excessively. 
Tongue Storage Area 
Check that the storage area is solid and secured to 
the tongue. 
Check that cargo in the storage area i.e. chains, 
binders, etc. are secure. 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-5 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
11.3 – School Bus Only 
Emergency Equipment 
In addition to checking for spare electrical fuses (if 
equipped), three red reflective triangles, 6 fusees 
or 3 liquid burning flares and a properly charged 
and rated fire extinguisher, school bus drivers must 
also inspect the following emergency equipment: 
Emergency Kit 
Body Fluid Cleanup Kit 
Lighting Indicators 
In addition to checking the lighting indicators listed 
in Section 10.2 of this manual, school bus drivers 
must also check the following lighting indicators 
(internal panel lights): 
Alternately flashing amber lights indicator, if 
equipped. 
Alternately flashing red lights indicator. 
Strobe light indicator, if equipped. 
Lights/Reflectors 
In addition to checking the lights and reflective 
devices listed in Section 10.2 of this manual, 
school bus drivers must also check the following 
(external) lights and reflectors: 
Strobe light, if equipped is operational and is not 
broken. 
Stop arm light, if equipped. 
Alternately flashing amber lights, if equipped are 
operational and not broken. 
Alternately flashing red lights, on both the front and 
back of the vehicle are operational and not 
broken.. 
Student Mirrors 
In addition to checking the external mirrors, school 
bus drivers must also check the internal and 
external mirrors used for observing students: 
Check for proper adjustment. 
Checks that all internal and external mirrors and 
mirror brackets are not damaged and are mounted 
securely with no loose fittings. 
Checks that visibility is not impaired due to dirty 
mirrors. 
Stop Arm/Safety Arm 
If equipped, check the stop arm to see that it is 
mounted securely to the frame of the vehicle. Also, 
check for loose fittings and damage.  Checks that 
stop arm extends fully when operated 
Passenger Entry/Lift 
Check that the entry door is not damaged, 
operates smoothly, and closes securely from the 
inside.  
Hand rails are secure and the step light is working, 
if equipped. 
The entry steps must be clear with the treads not 
loose or worn excessively. 
If equipped with a handicap lift, look for leaking, 
damaged, or missing parts and explain how lift 
should be checked for correct operation. Lift must 
be fully retracted and latched securely. 
Emergency Exit 
Demonstrate that at least one  emergency exit is  
not damaged, operates smoothly, and closes 
securely from the inside.   
Check that release handle can be operated 
properly from both inside and outside the vehicle. 
Point out and describe how all other emergency 
exits operate 
Check that any emergency exit warning devices 
are working properly. 
Seating 
Look for broken seat frames and check that seat 
frames are firmly attached to the floor. 
Check that seat cushions are attached securely to 
the seat frames. 
11.4 – Trailer 
11.4.1 – Trailer Front 
Air/Electrical Connections 
Check that trailer air connectors are sealed and in 
good condition. 
Make sure glad hands are locked in place, free of 
damage or air leaks. 
Make sure the trailer electrical plug is firmly seated 
and locked in place. 
Header Board 
If equipped, check the header board to see that it 
is secure, free of damage, and strong enough to 
contain cargo. 
If equipped, the canvas or tarp carrier must be 
mounted and fastened securely. 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-6 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
On enclosed trailers, check the front area for signs 
of damage such as cracks, bulges, or holes. 
11.4.2 – Side of Trailer 
Landing Gear 
Check that the landing gear is fully raised, has no 
missing parts, crank handle is secure, and the 
support frame and landing pads are  not damaged. 
If power operated, check for air or hydraulic leaks. 
Doors/Ties/Lifts 
If equipped, check that doors are not damaged. 
Check that doors open, close, and latch properly 
from the outside. 
Check that ties, straps, chains, and binders are 
secure. 
If equipped with a cargo lift, look for leaking, 
damaged or missing parts and explain how it 
should be checked for correct operation. 
Lift should be fully retracted and latched securely. 
Frame 
Look for cracks, broken welds, holes or other 
damage to the frame, cross members, box, and 
floor. 
Tandem Release Arm/Locking Pins 
If equipped, make sure the locking pins are locked 
in place and release arm is secured. 
11.4.3 – Remainder of Trailer 
Remainder of Trailer 
Please refer to Section 11.2 of this manual for 
detailed inspection procedures regarding the 
following components: 
Wheels. 
Suspension system.  
Brakes. 
Doors/ties/lift. 
Splash guards. 
11.5 – Coach/Transit Bus 
11.5.1 – Passenger Items 
Passenger Entry/Lift 
Check that entry doors operate smoothly and close 
securely from the inside. 
Check that hand rails are secure and, if equipped, 
that the step light(s) are working. 
Check that the entry steps are clear, with the 
treads not loose or worn excessively. 
If equipped with a handicap lift, look for any 
leaking, damaged or missing part, and explain how 
it should be checked for correct operation. 
Lift should be fully retracted and latched securely. 
Emergency Exits 
Make sure that all emergency exits are not 
damaged, operate smoothly, and close securely 
from the inside. 
Check that any emergency exit warning devices 
are working. 
Passenger Seating 
Look for broken seat frames and check that seat 
frames are firmly attached to the floor. 
Check that seat cushions are attached securely to 
the seat frames. 
11.5.2 – Entry/ Exit 
Doors/Mirrors 
Check that entry/exit doors are not damaged and 
operate smoothly from the outside. Hinges should 
be secure with seals intact. 
Make sure that the passenger exit mirrors and all 
external mirrors and mirror brackets are not 
damaged and are mounted securely with no loose 
fittings. 
11.5.3 – External Inspection of Coach/ Transit 
Bus 
Level/Air Leaks 
See that the vehicle is sitting level (front and rear), 
and if air-equipped, check for audible air leaks from 
the suspension system.  
Fuel Tank(s) 
See that fuel tank(s) are secure with no leaks from 
tank(s) or lines. 
Baggage Compartments 
Check that baggage and all other exterior 
compartment doors are not damaged, operate 
properly, and latch securely. 
Battery/Box 
Wherever located, see that battery(s) are secure, 
connections are tight, and cell caps are present. 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-7 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Battery connections should not show signs of 
excessive corrosion. 
Check that battery box and cover or door is not 
damaged and is secure. 
11.5.4 – Remainder of Coach/ Transit Bus 
Remainder of Vehicle 
Please refer to Section 11.2 of this manual for 
detailed inspection procedures for the remainder of 
the vehicle. 
Remember, the Vehicle Inspection must be passed 
before you can proceed to the Basic Control Skills 
test. 
11.6 – Taking the CDL Vehicle 
Inspection Test 
11.6.1 – Class A Vehicle Inspection Test 
If you are applying for a Class A CDL, you will be 
required to perform one of the four versions of a 
Vehicle inspection in the vehicle you have brought 
with you for testing. Each of the four tests are 
equivalent and you will not know which test you will 
take until just before the testing begins. 
All of the tests include an engine start, an in-cab
inspection, and an inspection of the coupling 
system. Then, your test may require an inspection 
of the entire vehicle or only a portion of the vehicle 
which your CDL Examiner will explain to you. 
11.6.2 – Class B and C Vehicle Inspection Test 
If you are applying for a Class B CDL, you will be 
required to perform one of the three versions of a 
Vehicle inspection in the vehicle you have brought 
with you for testing. Each of the three tests are 
equivalent and you will not know which test you will 
take until just before the testing begins. 
All of the tests include an engine start and an in
cab inspection. Then, your test may require an 
inspection of the entire vehicle or only a portion of 
the vehicle which your CDL Examiner will explain to 
you. You will also have to inspect any special 
features of your vehicle (e.g, school or transit bus).
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-8 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-9 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
THIS PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK. 
Section 11 - Vehicle Inspection   
Page 11-10 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 12  
Basic Vehicle Control 
Skills Test 
This Section Covers 
• Skills Test Scoring 
• Skills Test Exercises 
Your basic control skills could be tested using one 
or more of the following exercises off-road or 
somewhere on the street during the road test: 
Straight line backing. 
Offset back/right 
Offset back/left 
Parallel park (driver side). 
Parallel park (conventional). 
Alley dock. 
These exercises are shown in Figures 12-1 through 
12-6. 
12.1 Scoring 
Crossing Boundaries (encroachments) 
Pull-ups 
Outside Vehicle Observations (looks) 
Final Position/Inside Parallel 
Encroachments – The examiner will score the 
number of times you touch or cross over an exercise 
boundary line or cone with any portion of your 
vehicle. Each encroachment will count as an error. 
Pull-ups –   When a driver stops and pulls forward 
to clear an encroachment or to get a better position, 
it is scored as a “pull-up”. Stopping without changing 
direction does not count as a pull-up.  You will not 
be penalized for initial pull-ups. However, an 
excessive number of pull-ups, will count as errors. 
Outside Vehicle Observations (Looks) – You 
may be permitted to safely stop and exit the vehicle 
to check the external position of the vehicle (look).  
When doing so, you must place the vehicle in 
neutral and set the parking brake(s).  Then, when 
exiting the vehicle, you must do so safely by facing 
the vehicle and maintaining three points of contact 
with the vehicle at all times (when exiting a bus, 
maintain a firm grasp on the handrail at all times).  If 
you do not safely secure the vehicle or safely exit 
the vehicle it may result in an automatic failure of 
the basic control skills test.    
The maximum number of times that you may look to 
check the position of you vehicle is two (2) except 
for the Straight Line Backing exercise, which allows 
one look.  Each time you open the door, move from 
a seated position where in physical control of the 
vehicle or on a bus walk to the back of a bus to get 
a better view, it is scored as a “look”.   
Final Position/Inside Parallel – It is important that 
you finish each exercise exactly as the examiner 
has instructed you. If you do not maneuver the 
vehicle into its final position as described by the 
examiner, you will be penalized and could fail the 
basic skills test. 
12.2 Exercises 
12.2.1 – Straight Line Backing 
You may be asked to back your vehicle in a straight 
line between two rows of cones without touching or 
crossing over the exercise boundaries. (See Figure 
12.1.) 
12.2.2 – Offset Back/Right 
You may be asked to back into a space that is to the 
right rear of your vehicle. You will drive straight 
forward the outer boundary.  From that position you 
must back the vehicle into the opposite lane until 
the front of your vehicle has passed the first set of 
cones without striking boundary lines or cones. (See 
Figure 12.2) 
12.2.3 – Offset Back/Left 
You may be asked to back into a space that is to the 
left rear of your vehicle. You will drive straight 
forward the outer boundary.  From that position, you 
must back the vehicle into the opposite lane until the 
front of your vehicle has passed the first set of cones 
without striking boundary lines or cones.  (See 
Figure 12.3) 
12.2.4 – Parallel Park (Driver Side) 
You may be asked to park in a parallel parking 
space that is on your left. You are to drive past the 
entrance to the parallel parking space with your 
vehicle parallel to the parking area; and back into 
the space without crossing front, side or rear 
boundaries marked by cones. You are required to 
get your entire vehicle completely into the space. 
(See Figure 12.4) 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills   
Page 12-1 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
12.2.5 – Parallel Park (Conventional) 
You may be asked to park in a parallel parking 
space that is on your right. You are to drive past the 
entrance to the parallel parking space with your 
vehicle parallel to the parking area; and back into 
the space without crossing front, side or rear 
boundaries marked by cones. You are required to 
get your entire vehicle completely into the space. 
(See Figure 12.5) 
12.2.6 – Alley Dock 
You may be asked to sight-side back your vehicle 
into an alley.  You will drive past the alley and 
position your vehicle parallel to the outer boundary.  
From that position, back into the alley bringing the 
rear of your vehicle within three feet of the rear of 
the alley without touching boundary lines or cones.  
Your vehicle must be straight within the alley/lane 
when you have completed the maneuver. (See 
Figure 12.6.)  
 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills   
Page 12-2 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills   Page 12-3 
Version: July 2022  
Figure 12.1: Straight Line Backing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.2: Offset Back/Right
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.3: Offset Back/Left 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Figure 12.4: Parallel Park (Driver Side) 
Figure 12.5: Parallel Park (Conventional) 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills   
Page 12-4 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills   Page 12-5 
Version: July 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.6: Alley Dock 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
90° Alley Dock  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK. 
Section 12 – Basic Control Skills   
Page 12-6 
Version: July 2022  
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
Section 13  
On-road Driving 
This Section Covers 
• How You Will Be Tested 
You will drive over a test route that has a variety of 
traffic situations. At all times during the test, you 
must drive in a safe and responsible manner; and 
you must: 
Wear your safety belt. 
Obey all traffic signs, signals, and laws. 
Complete the test without an accident or moving 
violation. 
During the driving test, the examiner will be scoring 
you on specific driving maneuvers as well as on 
your general driving behavior. You will follow the 
directions of the examiner. Directions will be given 
to you so you will have plenty of time to do what the 
examiner has asked. You will not be asked to drive 
in an unsafe manner. 
If your test route does not have certain traffic 
situations, you may be asked to simulate a traffic 
situation. You will do this by telling the examiner 
what you are or would be doing if you were in that 
traffic situation. 
13.1 – How You Will Be Tested 
13.1.1 – Turns 
You have been asked to make a turn: 
Check traffic in all directions. 
Use turn signals and safely get into the lane 
needed for the turn. 
As you approach the turn: 
Use turn signals to warn others of your turn. 
Slow down smoothly, change gears as needed to 
keep power, but do not coast unsafely. Unsafe 
coasting occurs when your vehicle is out of gear 
(clutch depressed or gearshift in neutral) for more 
than the length of your vehicle. 
If you must stop before making the turn: 
Come to a smooth stop without skidding. 
Come to a complete stop behind the stop line, 
crosswalk, or stop sign. 
If stopping behind another vehicle, stop where you 
can see the rear tires on the vehicle ahead of you 
(safe gap). 
Do not let your vehicle roll. 
Keep the front wheels aimed straight ahead.  
When ready to turn: 
Check traffic in all directions. 
Keep both hands on the steering wheel during the 
turn. 
Keep checking your mirror to make sure the 
vehicle does not hit anything on the inside of the 
turn. 
Vehicle should not move into oncoming traffic. 
Vehicle should finish turn in correct lane. 
After turn: 
Make sure turn signal is off. 
Get up to speed of traffic, use turn signal, and 
move into right-most lane when safe to do so (if not 
already there). 
Check mirrors and traffic. 
13.1.2 – Intersections 
As you approach an intersection: 
Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.  
Decelerate gently. 
Brake smoothly and, if necessary, change gears. 
If necessary, come to a complete stop (no 
coasting) behind any stop signs, signals, 
sidewalks, or stop lines maintaining a safe gap 
behind any vehicle in front of you. 
Your vehicle must not roll forward or backward. 
When driving through an intersection: 
Check traffic thoroughly in all directions. 
Decelerate and yield to any pedestrians and traffic 
in the intersection. 
Do not change lanes while proceeding through the 
intersection. 
Keep your hands on the wheel. 
Once through the intersection: 
Continue checking mirrors and traffic. 
Accelerate smoothly and change gears as 
necessary. 
Section 13 – On-road Driving  
Page 13-1 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
13.1.3 – Urban Business 
During this part of the test, you are expected to 
make regular traffic checks and maintain a safe 
following distance. Your vehicle should be centered 
in the proper lane (right-most lane) and you should 
keep up with the flow of traffic but not exceed the 
posted speed limit. 
13.1.4 –Lane Changes 
During multiple lane portions of the test, you will be 
asked to change lanes to the left, and then back to 
the right. You should make the necessary traffic 
checks first, then use proper signals and smoothly 
change lanes when it is safe to do so. 
13.1.5 – Expressway or Rural/Limited Access 
Highway 
Before entering the expressway: 
Check traffic. 
Use proper signals. 
Merge smoothly into the proper lane of traffic. 
Once on the expressway: 
Maintain proper lane positioning, vehicle spacing, 
and vehicle speed.  
Continue to check traffic thoroughly in all directions. 
When exiting the expressway: 
Make necessary traffic checks. 
Use proper signals. 
Decelerate smoothly in the exit lane.  
Once on the exit ramp, you must continue to 
decelerate within the lane markings and maintain 
adequate spacing between your vehicle and other 
vehicles. 
13.1.6 – Stop/Start 
For this maneuver, you will be asked to pull your 
vehicle over to the side of the road and stop as if 
you were going to get out and check something on 
your vehicle. You must check traffic thoroughly in all 
directions and move to the right-most lane or 
shoulder of road. 
As you prepare for the stop: 
Check traffic. 
Activate your right turn signal. 
Decelerate smoothly, brake evenly, change gears 
as necessary. 
Bring your vehicle to a full stop without coasting. 
Once stopped: 
Vehicle must be parallel to the curb or shoulder of 
the road and safely out of the traffic flow. 
Vehicle should not be blocking driveways, fire 
hydrants, intersections, signs, etc. 
Cancel your turn signal. 
Activate your four-way emergency flashers. 
Apply the parking brake. 
Move the gear shift to neutral or park. 
Remove your feet from the brake and clutch pedals. 
When instructed to resume: 
Check traffic and your mirrors thoroughly in all 
directions. 
Turn off your four-way flashers. 
Activate the left turn signal. 
When traffic permits, you should release the parking 
brake and pull straight ahead.  
Do not turn the wheel before your vehicle moves. 
Check traffic from all directions, especially to the 
left. 
Steer and accelerate smoothly into the proper lane 
when safe to do so. 
Once your vehicle is back into the flow of traffic, 
cancel your left turn signal. 
13.1.7 – Curve 
When approaching a curve: 
Check traffic thoroughly in all directions.  
Before entering the curve, reduce speed so further 
braking or shifting is not required in the curve. 
Keep vehicle in the lane. 
Continue checking traffic in all directions. 
13.1.8 – Railroad Crossing 
Before reaching the crossing, all commercial drivers 
should: 
Decelerate, brake smoothly, and shift gears as 
necessary. 
Look and listen for the presence of trains. 
Check traffic in all directions.  
Do not stop, change gears, pass another vehicle, or 
change lanes while any part of your vehicle is in the 
crossing.  
Section 13 – On-road Driving  
Page 13-2 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
If you are driving a bus, a school bus, or a vehicle 
displaying placards, you should be prepared to 
observe the following procedures at every railroad 
crossing (unless the crossing is exempt):  
As the vehicle approaches a railroad crossing, 
activate the four-way flashers. 
Stop the vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 
feet from the nearest rail. 
Listen and look in both directions along the track for 
an approaching train and for signals indicating the 
approach of a train. If operating a bus, you may also 
be required to open the window and door prior to 
crossing tracks. 
Keep hands on the steering wheel as the vehicle 
crosses the tracks. 
Do not stop, change gears, or change lanes while 
any part of your vehicle is proceeding across the 
tracks.  
Four-way flashers should be deactivated after the 
vehicle crosses the tracks. 
Continue to check mirrors and traffic.  
Not all driving road test routes will have a railroad 
crossing. You may be asked to explain and 
demonstrate the proper railroad crossing 
procedures to the examiner at a simulated location. 
Note: In Florida CDL tests, railroad crossings for 
all vehicles will be scored according to 
procedures
 for
 vehicles
 transporting 
passengers or hazmat (Sections 4.3.5 and 
9.6.12) 
13.1.9 – Bridge/Overpass/Sign 
After driving under an overpass, you may be asked 
to tell the examiner what the posted clearance or 
height was. After going over a bridge, you may be 
asked to tell the examiner what the posted weight 
limit was. If your test route does not have a bridge 
or overpass, you may be asked about another traffic 
sign. When asked, be prepared to identify and 
explain to the examiner any traffic sign which may 
appear on the route. 
13.1.10 – Student Discharge (School Bus) 
If you are applying for a School Bus endorsement, 
you will be required to demonstrate a student 
discharge. Please refer to section 10 of this manual.   
As you approach the student pick up, you must:  
Decelerate and approach at a slow rate of speed 
while continuing to check traffic.  
Activate amber warning lights and right turn signals. 
Move as far as possible to the right on the traveled 
portion of the roadway.  
Recheck traffic.  
As you stop for the student discharge, you must: 
Bring school bus to a complete stop at least 10’ 
away from students at the stop. 
Place the transmission in neutral/park and set the 
parking brake.  
Activate the stop arm and red warning lights. 
When discharging students, you must:  
Communicate to students.  
Check traffic.  
Open the student door.  
Check for students.  
When students are crossing, you must:  
Check traffic.  
Communicate to students.  
Check for students.  
When resuming from the student discharge, you 
must:  
Check all mirrors.  
Turn off warning lights and stop arm. 
Close the door  
Check traffic.  
Accelerate away from the stop area.  
13.1.11 – General Driving Behaviors 
You will be scored on your overall performance in 
the following general driving behavior categories: 
13.1.11(a) – Clutch Usage (for Manual 
Transmission) 
Always use clutch to shift. 
If equipped with an unsynchronized manual 
transmission, you must double-clutch when 
shifting. Do not rev or lug the engine. 
Do not ride clutch to control speed, coast with the 
clutch depressed, or "pop" the clutch. 
13.1.12(b) – Gear Usage (for Manual 
Transmission) 
Do not grind or clash gears. 
Select gear that does not rev or lug engine. 
Do not shift in turns and intersections. 
Section 13 – On-road Driving  
Page 13-3 
Version: July 2022 
Commercial Driver’s License Manual   
13.1.13(c) – Brake Usage  
Do not ride or pump brake. 
Do not brake harshly. Brake smoothly using steady 
pressure. 
13.1.14(d) – Lane Usage 
Do not put vehicle over curbs, sidewalks, or lane 
markings. 
Stop behind stop lines, crosswalks, or stop signs. 
Complete a turn in the proper lane on a multiple 
lane road (vehicle should finish a left turn in the 
lane directly to the right of the center line). 
Finish a right turn in the right-most (curb) lane. 
Move to or remain in right-most lane unless lane is 
blocked. 
13.1.15 – Steering  
Do not over or under steer the vehicle. 
Keep both hands on the steering wheel at all times 
unless shifting.  Once you have completed shift, 
return both hands to the steering wheel.   
13.1.16 – Regular Traffic Checks  
Check traffic regularly.  
Check mirrors regularly.  
Check mirrors and traffic before, while in and after 
an intersection.   
Scan and check traffic in high volume areas and 
areas where pedestrians are expected to be 
present.   
13.1.17 – Use of Turn Signals 
Use turn signals properly.  
Activate turn signals when required.  
Activate turn signals at appropriate times.  
Cancel turn signals upon completion of a turn or 
lane change.  
